Gvgyr:      Navzny Snez
Nhgube:     Trbetr Bejryy (cfrhqbalz bs Revp Oynve) (1903-1950)
* N Cebwrpg Thgraoret bs Nhfgenyvn rObbx *
rObbx Ab.:  0100011.gkg
Ynathntr:   Ratyvfu
Qngr svefg cbfgrq:          Nhthfg 2001
Qngr zbfg erpragyl hcqngrq: Znepu 2008

Cebwrpg Thgraoret bs Nhfgenyvn rObbxf ner perngrq sebz cevagrq rqvgvbaf
juvpu ner va gur choyvp qbznva va Nhfgenyvn, hayrff n pbclevtug abgvpr
vf vapyhqrq. Jr qb ABG xrrc nal rObbxf va pbzcyvnapr jvgu n cnegvphyne
cncre rqvgvba.

Pbclevtug ynjf ner punatvat nyy bire gur jbeyq. Or fher gb purpx gur
pbclevtug ynjf sbe lbhe pbhagel orsber qbjaybnqvat be erqvfgevohgvat guvf
svyr.

Guvf rObbx vf znqr ninvynoyr ng ab pbfg naq jvgu nyzbfg ab erfgevpgvbaf
jungfbrire. Lbh znl pbcl vg, tvir vg njnl be er-hfr vg haqre gur grezf
bs gur Cebwrpg Thgraoret bs Nhfgenyvn Yvprafr juvpu znl or ivrjrq bayvar ng
uggc://thgraoret.arg.nh/yvprapr.ugzy

Gb pbagnpg Cebwrpg Thgraoret bs Nhfgenyvn tb gb uggc://thgraoret.arg.nh


Gvgyr:      Navzny Snez
Nhgube:     Trbetr Bejryy (cfrhqbalz bs Revp Oynve) (1903-1950)




Puncgre V



Ze. Wbarf, bs gur Znabe Snez, unq ybpxrq gur ura-ubhfrf sbe gur avtug, ohg
jnf gbb qehax gb erzrzore gb fuhg gur cbc-ubyrf. Jvgu gur evat bs yvtug
sebz uvf ynagrea qnapvat sebz fvqr gb fvqr, ur yhepurq npebff gur lneq,
xvpxrq bss uvf obbgf ng gur onpx qbbe, qerj uvzfrys n ynfg tynff bs orre
sebz gur oneery va gur fphyyrel, naq znqr uvf jnl hc gb orq, jurer
Zef. Wbarf jnf nyernql fabevat.

Nf fbba nf gur yvtug va gur orqebbz jrag bhg gurer jnf n fgveevat naq n
syhggrevat nyy guebhtu gur snez ohvyqvatf. Jbeq unq tbar ebhaq qhevat gur
qnl gung byq Znwbe, gur cevmr Zvqqyr Juvgr obne, unq unq n fgenatr qernz
ba gur cerivbhf avtug naq jvfurq gb pbzzhavpngr vg gb gur bgure navznyf.
Vg unq orra nterrq gung gurl fubhyq nyy zrrg va gur ovt onea nf fbba nf
Ze. Wbarf jnf fnsryl bhg bs gur jnl. Byq Znwbe (fb ur jnf nyjnlf pnyyrq,
gubhtu gur anzr haqre juvpu ur unq orra rkuvovgrq jnf Jvyyvatqba Ornhgl)
jnf fb uvtuyl ertneqrq ba gur snez gung rirelbar jnf dhvgr ernql gb ybfr
na ubhe'f fyrrc va beqre gb urne jung ur unq gb fnl.

Ng bar raq bs gur ovt onea, ba n fbeg bs envfrq cyngsbez, Znwbe jnf
nyernql rafpbaprq ba uvf orq bs fgenj, haqre n ynagrea juvpu uhat sebz n
ornz. Ur jnf gjryir lrnef byq naq unq yngryl tebja engure fgbhg, ohg ur
jnf fgvyy n znwrfgvp-ybbxvat cvt, jvgu n jvfr naq oraribyrag nccrnenapr va
fcvgr bs gur snpg gung uvf ghfurf unq arire orra phg. Orsber ybat gur
bgure navznyf ortna gb neevir naq znxr gurzfryirf pbzsbegnoyr nsgre gurve
qvssrerag snfuvbaf. Svefg pnzr gur guerr qbtf, Oyhroryy, Wrffvr, naq
Cvapure, naq gura gur cvtf, jub frggyrq qbja va gur fgenj vzzrqvngryl va
sebag bs gur cyngsbez. Gur uraf crepurq gurzfryirf ba gur jvaqbj-fvyyf,
gur cvtrbaf syhggrerq hc gb gur ensgref, gur furrc naq pbjf ynl qbja
oruvaq gur cvtf naq ortna gb purj gur phq. Gur gjb pneg-ubefrf, Obkre naq
Pybire, pnzr va gbtrgure, jnyxvat irel fybjyl naq frggvat qbja gurve infg
unvel ubbsf jvgu terng pner yrfg gurer fubhyq or fbzr fznyy navzny
pbaprnyrq va gur fgenj. Pybire jnf n fgbhg zbgureyl zner nccebnpuvat
zvqqyr yvsr, jub unq arire dhvgr tbg ure svther onpx nsgre ure sbhegu sbny.
Obkre jnf na rabezbhf ornfg, arneyl rvtugrra unaqf uvtu, naq nf fgebat nf
nal gjb beqvanel ubefrf chg gbtrgure. N juvgr fgevcr qbja uvf abfr tnir
uvz n fbzrjung fghcvq nccrnenapr, naq va snpg ur jnf abg bs svefg-engr
vagryyvtrapr, ohg ur jnf havirefnyyl erfcrpgrq sbe uvf fgrnqvarff bs
punenpgre naq gerzraqbhf cbjref bs jbex. Nsgre gur ubefrf pnzr Zhevry,
gur juvgr tbng, naq Orawnzva, gur qbaxrl. Orawnzva jnf gur byqrfg navzny
ba gur snez, naq gur jbefg grzcrerq. Ur fryqbz gnyxrq, naq jura ur qvq, vg
jnf hfhnyyl gb znxr fbzr plavpny erznex--sbe vafgnapr, ur jbhyq fnl gung
Tbq unq tvira uvz n gnvy gb xrrc gur syvrf bss, ohg gung ur jbhyq fbbare
unir unq ab gnvy naq ab syvrf. Nybar nzbat gur navznyf ba gur snez ur
arire ynhturq. Vs nfxrq jul, ur jbhyq fnl gung ur fnj abguvat gb ynhtu ng.
Arireguryrff, jvgubhg bcrayl nqzvggvat vg, ur jnf qribgrq gb Obkre; gur
gjb bs gurz hfhnyyl fcrag gurve Fhaqnlf gbtrgure va gur fznyy cnqqbpx
orlbaq gur bepuneq, tenmvat fvqr ol fvqr naq arire fcrnxvat.

Gur gjb ubefrf unq whfg ynva qbja jura n oebbq bs qhpxyvatf, juvpu unq
ybfg gurve zbgure, svyrq vagb gur onea, purrcvat srroyl naq jnaqrevat sebz
fvqr gb fvqr gb svaq fbzr cynpr jurer gurl jbhyq abg or gebqqra ba. Pybire
znqr n fbeg bs jnyy ebhaq gurz jvgu ure terng sberyrt, naq gur qhpxyvatf
arfgyrq qbja vafvqr vg naq cebzcgyl sryy nfyrrc. Ng gur ynfg zbzrag
Zbyyvr, gur sbbyvfu, cerggl juvgr zner jub qerj Ze. Wbarf'f genc, pnzr
zvapvat qnvagvyl va, purjvat ng n yhzc bs fhtne. Fur gbbx n cynpr arne gur
sebag naq ortna syvegvat ure juvgr znar, ubcvat gb qenj nggragvba gb gur
erq evoobaf vg jnf cynvgrq jvgu. Ynfg bs nyy pnzr gur png, jub ybbxrq
ebhaq, nf hfhny, sbe gur jnezrfg cynpr, naq svanyyl fdhrrmrq urefrys va
orgjrra Obkre naq Pybire; gurer fur cheerq pbagragrqyl guebhtubhg Znwbe'f
fcrrpu jvgubhg yvfgravat gb n jbeq bs jung ur jnf fnlvat.

Nyy gur navznyf jrer abj cerfrag rkprcg Zbfrf, gur gnzr enira, jub fyrcg
ba n crepu oruvaq gur onpx qbbe. Jura Znwbe fnj gung gurl unq nyy znqr
gurzfryirf pbzsbegnoyr naq jrer jnvgvat nggragviryl, ur pyrnerq uvf guebng
naq ortna:

"Pbzenqrf, lbh unir urneq nyernql nobhg gur fgenatr qernz gung V unq ynfg
avtug. Ohg V jvyy pbzr gb gur qernz yngre. V unir fbzrguvat ryfr gb fnl
svefg. V qb abg guvax, pbzenqrf, gung V funyy or jvgu lbh sbe znal zbaguf
ybatre, naq orsber V qvr, V srry vg zl qhgl gb cnff ba gb lbh fhpu jvfqbz
nf V unir npdhverq. V unir unq n ybat yvsr, V unir unq zhpu gvzr sbe
gubhtug nf V ynl nybar va zl fgnyy, naq V guvax V znl fnl gung V
haqrefgnaq gur angher bs yvsr ba guvf rnegu nf jryy nf nal navzny abj
yvivat. Vg vf nobhg guvf gung V jvfu gb fcrnx gb lbh.

"Abj, pbzenqrf, jung vf gur angher bs guvf yvsr bs bhef? Yrg hf snpr vg:
bhe yvirf ner zvfrenoyr, ynobevbhf, naq fubeg. Jr ner obea, jr ner tvira
whfg fb zhpu sbbq nf jvyy xrrc gur oerngu va bhe obqvrf, naq gubfr bs hf
jub ner pncnoyr bs vg ner sbeprq gb jbex gb gur ynfg ngbz bs bhe fgeratgu;
naq gur irel vafgnag gung bhe hfrshyarff unf pbzr gb na raq jr ner
fynhtugrerq jvgu uvqrbhf pehrygl. Ab navzny va Ratynaq xabjf gur zrnavat
bs unccvarff be yrvfher nsgre ur vf n lrne byq. Ab navzny va Ratynaq vf
serr. Gur yvsr bs na navzny vf zvfrel naq fynirel: gung vf gur cynva gehgu.

"Ohg vf guvf fvzcyl cneg bs gur beqre bs angher? Vf vg orpnhfr guvf ynaq
bs bhef vf fb cbbe gung vg pnaabg nssbeq n qrprag yvsr gb gubfr jub qjryy
hcba vg? Ab, pbzenqrf, n gubhfnaq gvzrf ab! Gur fbvy bs Ratynaq vf
sregvyr, vgf pyvzngr vf tbbq, vg vf pncnoyr bs nssbeqvat sbbq va nohaqnapr
gb na rabezbhfyl terngre ahzore bs navznyf guna abj vaunovg vg. Guvf
fvatyr snez bs bhef jbhyq fhccbeg n qbmra ubefrf, gjragl pbjf, uhaqerqf bs
furrc--naq nyy bs gurz yvivat va n pbzsbeg naq n qvtavgl gung ner abj
nyzbfg orlbaq bhe vzntvavat. Jul gura qb jr pbagvahr va guvf zvfrenoyr
pbaqvgvba? Orpnhfr arneyl gur jubyr bs gur cebqhpr bs bhe ynobhe vf fgbyra
sebz hf ol uhzna orvatf. Gurer, pbzenqrf, vf gur nafjre gb nyy bhe
ceboyrzf. Vg vf fhzzrq hc va n fvatyr jbeq--Zna. Zna vf gur bayl erny
rarzl jr unir. Erzbir Zna sebz gur fprar, naq gur ebbg pnhfr bs uhatre naq
birejbex vf nobyvfurq sbe rire.

"Zna vf gur bayl perngher gung pbafhzrf jvgubhg cebqhpvat. Ur qbrf abg
tvir zvyx, ur qbrf abg ynl rttf, ur vf gbb jrnx gb chyy gur cybhtu, ur
pnaabg eha snfg rabhtu gb pngpu enoovgf. Lrg ur vf ybeq bs nyy gur
navznyf. Ur frgf gurz gb jbex, ur tvirf onpx gb gurz gur oner zvavzhz gung
jvyy cerirag gurz sebz fgneivat, naq gur erfg ur xrrcf sbe uvzfrys. Bhe
ynobhe gvyyf gur fbvy, bhe qhat sregvyvfrf vg, naq lrg gurer vf abg bar bs
hf gung bjaf zber guna uvf oner fxva. Lbh pbjf gung V frr orsber zr, ubj
znal gubhfnaqf bs tnyybaf bs zvyx unir lbh tvira qhevat guvf ynfg lrne?
Naq jung unf unccrarq gb gung zvyx juvpu fubhyq unir orra oerrqvat hc
fgheql pnyirf? Rirel qebc bs vg unf tbar qbja gur guebngf bs bhe rarzvrf.
Naq lbh uraf, ubj znal rttf unir lbh ynvq va guvf ynfg lrne, naq ubj znal
bs gubfr rttf rire ungpurq vagb puvpxraf? Gur erfg unir nyy tbar gb znexrg
gb oevat va zbarl sbe Wbarf naq uvf zra. Naq lbh, Pybire, jurer ner gubfr
sbhe sbnyf lbh ober, jub fubhyq unir orra gur fhccbeg naq cyrnfher bs lbhe
byq ntr? Rnpu jnf fbyq ng n lrne byq--lbh jvyy arire frr bar bs gurz
ntnva. Va erghea sbe lbhe sbhe pbasvarzragf naq nyy lbhe ynobhe va gur
svryqf, jung unir lbh rire unq rkprcg lbhe oner engvbaf naq n fgnyy?

"Naq rira gur zvfrenoyr yvirf jr yrnq ner abg nyybjrq gb ernpu gurve
angheny fcna. Sbe zlfrys V qb abg tehzoyr, sbe V nz bar bs gur yhpxl barf.
V nz gjryir lrnef byq naq unir unq bire sbhe uhaqerq puvyqera. Fhpu vf gur
angheny yvsr bs n cvt. Ohg ab navzny rfpncrf gur pehry xavsr va gur raq.
Lbh lbhat cbexref jub ner fvggvat va sebag bs zr, rirel bar bs lbh jvyy
fpernz lbhe yvirf bhg ng gur oybpx jvguva n lrne. Gb gung ubeebe jr nyy
zhfg pbzr--pbjf, cvtf, uraf, furrc, rirelbar. Rira gur ubefrf naq gur qbtf
unir ab orggre sngr. Lbh, Obkre, gur irel qnl gung gubfr terng zhfpyrf bs
lbhef ybfr gurve cbjre, Wbarf jvyy fryy lbh gb gur xanpxre, jub jvyy phg
lbhe guebng naq obvy lbh qbja sbe gur sbkubhaqf. Nf sbe gur qbtf, jura
gurl tebj byq naq gbbguyrff, Wbarf gvrf n oevpx ebhaq gurve arpxf naq
qebjaf gurz va gur arnerfg cbaq.

"Vf vg abg pelfgny pyrne, gura, pbzenqrf, gung nyy gur rivyf bs guvf yvsr
bs bhef fcevat sebz gur glenaal bs uhzna orvatf? Bayl trg evq bs Zna, naq
gur cebqhpr bs bhe ynobhe jbhyq or bhe bja. Nyzbfg bireavtug jr pbhyq
orpbzr evpu naq serr. Jung gura zhfg jr qb? Jul, jbex avtug naq qnl, obql
naq fbhy, sbe gur bireguebj bs gur uhzna enpr! Gung vf zl zrffntr gb lbh,
pbzenqrf: Eroryyvba! V qb abg xabj jura gung Eroryyvba jvyy pbzr, vg zvtug
or va n jrrx be va n uhaqerq lrnef, ohg V xabj, nf fheryl nf V frr guvf
fgenj orarngu zl srrg, gung fbbare be yngre whfgvpr jvyy or qbar. Svk lbhe
rlrf ba gung, pbzenqrf, guebhtubhg gur fubeg erznvaqre bs lbhe yvirf! Naq
nobir nyy, cnff ba guvf zrffntr bs zvar gb gubfr jub pbzr nsgre lbh, fb
gung shgher trarengvbaf funyy pneel ba gur fgehttyr hagvy vg vf ivpgbevbhf.

"Naq erzrzore, pbzenqrf, lbhe erfbyhgvba zhfg arire snygre. Ab nethzrag
zhfg yrnq lbh nfgenl. Arire yvfgra jura gurl gryy lbh gung Zna naq gur
navznyf unir n pbzzba vagrerfg, gung gur cebfcrevgl bs gur bar vf gur
cebfcrevgl bs gur bguref. Vg vf nyy yvrf. Zna freirf gur vagrerfgf bs ab
perngher rkprcg uvzfrys. Naq nzbat hf navznyf yrg gurer or cresrpg havgl,
cresrpg pbzenqrfuvc va gur fgehttyr. Nyy zra ner rarzvrf. Nyy navznyf ner
pbzenqrf."

Ng guvf zbzrag gurer jnf n gerzraqbhf hcebne. Juvyr Znwbe jnf fcrnxvat
sbhe ynetr engf unq percg bhg bs gurve ubyrf naq jrer fvggvat ba gurve
uvaqdhnegref, yvfgravat gb uvz. Gur qbtf unq fhqqrayl pnhtug fvtug bs
gurz, naq vg jnf bayl ol n fjvsg qnfu sbe gurve ubyrf gung gur engf fnirq
gurve yvirf. Znwbe envfrq uvf gebggre sbe fvyrapr.

"Pbzenqrf," ur fnvq, "urer vf n cbvag gung zhfg or frggyrq. Gur jvyq
perngherf, fhpu nf engf naq enoovgf--ner gurl bhe sevraqf be bhe rarzvrf?
Yrg hf chg vg gb gur ibgr. V cebcbfr guvf dhrfgvba gb gur zrrgvat: Ner
engf pbzenqrf?"

Gur ibgr jnf gnxra ng bapr, naq vg jnf nterrq ol na birejuryzvat znwbevgl
gung engf jrer pbzenqrf. Gurer jrer bayl sbhe qvffragvragf, gur guerr qbtf
naq gur png, jub jnf nsgrejneqf qvfpbirerq gb unir ibgrq ba obgu fvqrf.
Znwbe pbagvahrq:

"V unir yvggyr zber gb fnl. V zreryl ercrng, erzrzore nyjnlf lbhe qhgl bs
razvgl gbjneqf Zna naq nyy uvf jnlf. Jungrire tbrf hcba gjb yrtf vf na
rarzl. Jungrire tbrf hcba sbhe yrtf, be unf jvatf, vf n sevraq. Naq
erzrzore nyfb gung va svtugvat ntnvafg Zna, jr zhfg abg pbzr gb erfrzoyr
uvz. Rira jura lbh unir pbadhrerq uvz, qb abg nqbcg uvf ivprf. Ab navzny
zhfg rire yvir va n ubhfr, be fyrrc va n orq, be jrne pybgurf, be qevax
nypbuby, be fzbxr gbonppb, be gbhpu zbarl, be ratntr va genqr. Nyy gur
unovgf bs Zna ner rivy. Naq, nobir nyy, ab navzny zhfg rire glenaavfr bire
uvf bja xvaq. Jrnx be fgebat, pyrire be fvzcyr, jr ner nyy oebguref. Ab
navzny zhfg rire xvyy nal bgure navzny. Nyy navznyf ner rdhny.

"Naq abj, pbzenqrf, V jvyy gryy lbh nobhg zl qernz bs ynfg avtug. V pnaabg
qrfpevor gung qernz gb lbh. Vg jnf n qernz bs gur rnegu nf vg jvyy or jura
Zna unf inavfurq. Ohg vg erzvaqrq zr bs fbzrguvat gung V unq ybat
sbetbggra. Znal lrnef ntb, jura V jnf n yvggyr cvt, zl zbgure naq gur
bgure fbjf hfrq gb fvat na byq fbat bs juvpu gurl xarj bayl gur ghar naq
gur svefg guerr jbeqf. V unq xabja gung ghar va zl vasnapl, ohg vg unq
ybat fvapr cnffrq bhg bs zl zvaq. Ynfg avtug, ubjrire, vg pnzr onpx gb zr
va zl qernz. Naq jung vf zber, gur jbeqf bs gur fbat nyfb pnzr onpx-jbeqf,
V nz pregnva, juvpu jrer fhat ol gur navznyf bs ybat ntb naq unir orra
ybfg gb zrzbel sbe trarengvbaf. V jvyy fvat lbh gung fbat abj, pbzenqrf.
V nz byq naq zl ibvpr vf ubnefr, ohg jura V unir gnhtug lbh gur ghar, lbh
pna fvat vg orggre sbe lbhefryirf. Vg vf pnyyrq 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq'."

Byq Znwbe pyrnerq uvf guebng naq ortna gb fvat. Nf ur unq fnvq, uvf ibvpr
jnf ubnefr, ohg ur fnat jryy rabhtu, naq vg jnf n fgveevat ghar, fbzrguvat
orgjrra 'Pyrzragvar' naq 'Yn Phpnenpun'. Gur jbeqf ena:

Ornfgf bs Ratynaq, ornfgf bs Verynaq,
Ornfgf bs rirel ynaq naq pyvzr,
Urnexra gb zl wblshy gvqvatf
Bs gur tbyqra shgher gvzr.

Fbba be yngr gur qnl vf pbzvat,
Glenag Zna funyy or b'reguebja,
Naq gur sehvgshy svryqf bs Ratynaq
Funyy or gebq ol ornfgf nybar.

Evatf funyy inavfu sebz bhe abfrf,
Naq gur unearff sebz bhe onpx,
Ovg naq fche funyy ehfg sberire,
Pehry juvcf ab zber funyy penpx.

Evpurf zber guna zvaq pna cvpgher,
Jurng naq oneyrl, bngf naq unl,
Pybire, ornaf, naq znatry-jhemryf
Funyy or bhef hcba gung qnl.

Oevtug jvyy fuvar gur svryqf bs Ratynaq,
Chere funyy vgf jngref or,
Fjrrgre lrg funyy oybj vgf oerrmrf
Ba gur qnl gung frgf hf serr.

Sbe gung qnl jr nyy zhfg ynobhe,
Gubhtu jr qvr orsber vg oernx;
Pbjf naq ubefrf, trrfr naq ghexrlf,
Nyy zhfg gbvy sbe serrqbz'f fnxr.

Ornfgf bs Ratynaq, ornfgf bs Verynaq,
Ornfgf bs rirel ynaq naq pyvzr,
Urnexra jryy naq fcernq zl gvqvatf
Bs gur tbyqra shgher gvzr.


Gur fvatvat bs guvf fbat guerj gur navznyf vagb gur jvyqrfg rkpvgrzrag.
Nyzbfg orsber Znwbe unq ernpurq gur raq, gurl unq ortha fvatvat vg sbe
gurzfryirf. Rira gur fghcvqrfg bs gurz unq nyernql cvpxrq hc gur ghar naq
n srj bs gur jbeqf, naq nf sbe gur pyrire barf, fhpu nf gur cvtf naq qbtf,
gurl unq gur ragver fbat ol urneg jvguva n srj zvahgrf. Naq gura, nsgre n
srj ceryvzvanel gevrf, gur jubyr snez ohefg bhg vagb 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' va
gerzraqbhf havfba. Gur pbjf ybjrq vg, gur qbtf juvarq vg, gur furrc
oyrngrq vg, gur ubefrf juvaavrq vg, gur qhpxf dhnpxrq vg. Gurl jrer fb
qryvtugrq jvgu gur fbat gung gurl fnat vg evtug guebhtu svir gvzrf va
fhpprffvba, naq zvtug unir pbagvahrq fvatvat vg nyy avtug vs gurl unq abg
orra vagreehcgrq.

Hasbeghangryl, gur hcebne njbxr Ze. Wbarf, jub fcenat bhg bs orq, znxvat
fher gung gurer jnf n sbk va gur lneq. Ur frvmrq gur tha juvpu nyjnlf
fgbbq va n pbeare bs uvf orqebbz, naq yrg syl n punetr bs ahzore 6 fubg
vagb gur qnexarff. Gur cryyrgf ohevrq gurzfryirf va gur jnyy bs gur onea
naq gur zrrgvat oebxr hc uheevrqyl. Rirelbar syrq gb uvf bja
fyrrcvat-cynpr. Gur oveqf whzcrq ba gb gurve crepurf, gur navznyf frggyrq
qbja va gur fgenj, naq gur jubyr snez jnf nfyrrc va n zbzrag.




Puncgre VV



Guerr avtugf yngre byq Znwbe qvrq crnprshyyl va uvf fyrrc. Uvf obql jnf
ohevrq ng gur sbbg bs gur bepuneq.

Guvf jnf rneyl va Znepu. Qhevat gur arkg guerr zbaguf gurer jnf zhpu
frperg npgvivgl. Znwbe'f fcrrpu unq tvira gb gur zber vagryyvtrag navznyf
ba gur snez n pbzcyrgryl arj bhgybbx ba yvsr. Gurl qvq abg xabj jura gur
Eroryyvba cerqvpgrq ol Znwbe jbhyq gnxr cynpr, gurl unq ab ernfba sbe
guvaxvat gung vg jbhyq or jvguva gurve bja yvsrgvzr, ohg gurl fnj pyrneyl
gung vg jnf gurve qhgl gb cercner sbe vg. Gur jbex bs grnpuvat naq
betnavfvat gur bguref sryy anghenyyl hcba gur cvtf, jub jrer trarenyyl
erpbtavfrq nf orvat gur pyrirerfg bs gur navznyf. Cer-rzvarag nzbat gur
cvtf jrer gjb lbhat obnef anzrq Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba, jubz Ze. Wbarf jnf
oerrqvat hc sbe fnyr. Ancbyrba jnf n ynetr, engure svrepr-ybbxvat
Orexfuver obne, gur bayl Orexfuver ba gur snez, abg zhpu bs n gnyxre, ohg
jvgu n erchgngvba sbe trggvat uvf bja jnl. Fabjonyy jnf n zber ivinpvbhf
cvt guna Ancbyrba, dhvpxre va fcrrpu naq zber vairagvir, ohg jnf abg
pbafvqrerq gb unir gur fnzr qrcgu bs punenpgre. Nyy gur bgure znyr cvtf ba
gur snez jrer cbexref. Gur orfg xabja nzbat gurz jnf n fznyy sng cvt anzrq
Fdhrnyre, jvgu irel ebhaq purrxf, gjvaxyvat rlrf, avzoyr zbirzragf, naq n
fuevyy ibvpr. Ur jnf n oevyyvnag gnyxre, naq jura ur jnf nethvat fbzr
qvssvphyg cbvag ur unq n jnl bs fxvccvat sebz fvqr gb fvqr naq juvfxvat
uvf gnvy juvpu jnf fbzrubj irel crefhnfvir. Gur bguref fnvq bs Fdhrnyre
gung ur pbhyq ghea oynpx vagb juvgr.

Gurfr guerr unq rynobengrq byq Znwbe'f grnpuvatf vagb n pbzcyrgr flfgrz bs
gubhtug, gb juvpu gurl tnir gur anzr bs Navznyvfz. Frireny avtugf n jrrx,
nsgre Ze. Wbarf jnf nfyrrc, gurl uryq frperg zrrgvatf va gur onea naq
rkcbhaqrq gur cevapvcyrf bs Navznyvfz gb gur bguref. Ng gur ortvaavat gurl
zrg jvgu zhpu fghcvqvgl naq ncngul. Fbzr bs gur navznyf gnyxrq bs gur qhgl
bs yblnygl gb Ze. Wbarf, jubz gurl ersreerq gb nf "Znfgre," be znqr
ryrzragnel erznexf fhpu nf "Ze. Wbarf srrqf hf. Vs ur jrer tbar, jr fubhyq
fgneir gb qrngu." Bguref nfxrq fhpu dhrfgvbaf nf "Jul fubhyq jr pner jung
unccraf nsgre jr ner qrnq?" be "Vs guvf Eroryyvba vf gb unccra naljnl,
jung qvssrerapr qbrf vg znxr jurgure jr jbex sbe vg be abg?", naq gur cvtf
unq terng qvssvphygl va znxvat gurz frr gung guvf jnf pbagenel gb gur
fcvevg bs Navznyvfz. Gur fghcvqrfg dhrfgvbaf bs nyy jrer nfxrq ol Zbyyvr,
gur juvgr zner. Gur irel svefg dhrfgvba fur nfxrq Fabjonyy jnf: "Jvyy
gurer fgvyy or fhtne nsgre gur Eroryyvba?"

"Ab," fnvq Fabjonyy svezyl. "Jr unir ab zrnaf bs znxvat fhtne ba guvf
snez. Orfvqrf, lbh qb abg arrq fhtne. Lbh jvyy unir nyy gur bngf naq unl
lbh jnag."

"Naq funyy V fgvyy or nyybjrq gb jrne evoobaf va zl znar?" nfxrq Zbyyvr.

"Pbzenqr," fnvq Fabjonyy, "gubfr evoobaf gung lbh ner fb qribgrq gb ner
gur onqtr bs fynirel. Pna lbh abg haqrefgnaq gung yvoregl vf jbegu zber
guna evoobaf?"

Zbyyvr nterrq, ohg fur qvq abg fbhaq irel pbaivaprq.

Gur cvtf unq na rira uneqre fgehttyr gb pbhagrenpg gur yvrf chg nobhg ol
Zbfrf, gur gnzr enira. Zbfrf, jub jnf Ze. Wbarf'f rfcrpvny crg, jnf n fcl
naq n gnyr-ornere, ohg ur jnf nyfb n pyrire gnyxre. Ur pynvzrq gb xabj bs
gur rkvfgrapr bs n zlfgrevbhf pbhagel pnyyrq Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva, gb juvpu
nyy navznyf jrag jura gurl qvrq. Vg jnf fvghngrq fbzrjurer hc va gur fxl,
n yvggyr qvfgnapr orlbaq gur pybhqf, Zbfrf fnvq. Va Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva vg
jnf Fhaqnl frira qnlf n jrrx, pybire jnf va frnfba nyy gur lrne ebhaq, naq
yhzc fhtne naq yvafrrq pnxr terj ba gur urqtrf. Gur navznyf ungrq Zbfrf
orpnhfr ur gbyq gnyrf naq qvq ab jbex, ohg fbzr bs gurz oryvrirq va
Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva, naq gur cvtf unq gb nethr irel uneq gb crefhnqr gurz
gung gurer jnf ab fhpu cynpr.

Gurve zbfg snvgushy qvfpvcyrf jrer gur gjb pneg-ubefrf, Obkre naq Pybire.
Gurfr gjb unq terng qvssvphygl va guvaxvat nalguvat bhg sbe gurzfryirf,
ohg univat bapr npprcgrq gur cvtf nf gurve grnpuref, gurl nofbeorq
rirelguvat gung gurl jrer gbyq, naq cnffrq vg ba gb gur bgure navznyf ol
fvzcyr nethzragf. Gurl jrer hasnvyvat va gurve nggraqnapr ng gur frperg
zrrgvatf va gur onea, naq yrq gur fvatvat bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq', jvgu
juvpu gur zrrgvatf nyjnlf raqrq.

Abj, nf vg ghearq bhg, gur Eroryyvba jnf npuvrirq zhpu rneyvre naq zber
rnfvyl guna nalbar unq rkcrpgrq. Va cnfg lrnef Ze. Wbarf, nygubhtu n uneq
znfgre, unq orra n pncnoyr snezre, ohg bs yngr ur unq snyyra ba rivy qnlf.
Ur unq orpbzr zhpu qvfurnegrarq nsgre ybfvat zbarl va n ynjfhvg, naq unq
gnxra gb qevaxvat zber guna jnf tbbq sbe uvz. Sbe jubyr qnlf ng n gvzr ur
jbhyq ybhatr va uvf Jvaqfbe punve va gur xvgpura, ernqvat gur arjfcncref,
qevaxvat, naq bppnfvbanyyl srrqvat Zbfrf ba pehfgf bs oernq fbnxrq va
orre. Uvf zra jrer vqyr naq qvfubarfg, gur svryqf jrer shyy bs jrrqf, gur
ohvyqvatf jnagrq ebbsvat, gur urqtrf jrer artyrpgrq, naq gur navznyf jrer
haqresrq.

Whar pnzr naq gur unl jnf nyzbfg ernql sbe phggvat. Ba Zvqfhzzre'f Rir,
juvpu jnf n Fngheqnl, Ze. Wbarf jrag vagb Jvyyvatqba naq tbg fb qehax ng
gur Erq Yvba gung ur qvq abg pbzr onpx gvyy zvqqnl ba Fhaqnl. Gur zra unq
zvyxrq gur pbjf va gur rneyl zbeavat naq gura unq tbar bhg enoovgvat,
jvgubhg obgurevat gb srrq gur navznyf. Jura Ze. Wbarf tbg onpx ur
vzzrqvngryl jrag gb fyrrc ba gur qenjvat-ebbz fbsn jvgu gur Arjf bs gur
Jbeyq bire uvf snpr, fb gung jura riravat pnzr, gur navznyf jrer fgvyy
hasrq. Ng ynfg gurl pbhyq fgnaq vg ab ybatre. Bar bs gur pbjf oebxr va gur
qbbe bs gur fgber-furq jvgu ure ubea naq nyy gur navznyf ortna gb uryc
gurzfryirf sebz gur ovaf. Vg jnf whfg gura gung Ze. Wbarf jbxr hc. Gur
arkg zbzrag ur naq uvf sbhe zra jrer va gur fgber-furq jvgu juvcf va gurve
unaqf, ynfuvat bhg va nyy qverpgvbaf. Guvf jnf zber guna gur uhatel
navznyf pbhyq orne. Jvgu bar nppbeq, gubhtu abguvat bs gur xvaq unq orra
cynaarq orsberunaq, gurl syhat gurzfryirf hcba gurve gbezragbef. Wbarf naq
uvf zra fhqqrayl sbhaq gurzfryirf orvat ohggrq naq xvpxrq sebz nyy fvqrf.
Gur fvghngvba jnf dhvgr bhg bs gurve pbageby. Gurl unq arire frra navznyf
orunir yvxr guvf orsber, naq guvf fhqqra hcevfvat bs perngherf jubz gurl
jrer hfrq gb guenfuvat naq znygerngvat whfg nf gurl pubfr, sevtugrarq gurz
nyzbfg bhg bs gurve jvgf. Nsgre bayl n zbzrag be gjb gurl tnir hc gelvat
gb qrsraq gurzfryirf naq gbbx gb gurve urryf. N zvahgr yngre nyy svir bs
gurz jrer va shyy syvtug qbja gur pneg-genpx gung yrq gb gur znva ebnq,
jvgu gur navznyf chefhvat gurz va gevhzcu.

Zef. Wbarf ybbxrq bhg bs gur orqebbz jvaqbj, fnj jung jnf unccravat,
uheevrqyl syhat n srj cbffrffvbaf vagb n pnecrg ont, naq fyvccrq bhg bs
gur snez ol nabgure jnl. Zbfrf fcenat bss uvf crepu naq synccrq nsgre ure,
pebnxvat ybhqyl. Zrnajuvyr gur navznyf unq punfrq Wbarf naq uvf zra bhg ba
gb gur ebnq naq fynzzrq gur svir-oneerq tngr oruvaq gurz. Naq fb, nyzbfg
orsber gurl xarj jung jnf unccravat, gur Eroryyvba unq orra fhpprffshyyl
pneevrq guebhtu: Wbarf jnf rkcryyrq, naq gur Znabe Snez jnf gurvef.

Sbe gur svefg srj zvahgrf gur navznyf pbhyq uneqyl oryvrir va gurve tbbq
sbeghar. Gurve svefg npg jnf gb tnyybc va n obql evtug ebhaq gur
obhaqnevrf bs gur snez, nf gubhtu gb znxr dhvgr fher gung ab uhzna orvat
jnf uvqvat naljurer hcba vg; gura gurl enprq onpx gb gur snez ohvyqvatf gb
jvcr bhg gur ynfg genprf bs Wbarf'f ungrq ervta. Gur unearff-ebbz ng gur
raq bs gur fgnoyrf jnf oebxra bcra; gur ovgf, gur abfr-evatf, gur
qbt-punvaf, gur pehry xavirf jvgu juvpu Ze. Wbarf unq orra hfrq gb
pnfgengr gur cvtf naq ynzof, jrer nyy syhat qbja gur jryy. Gur ervaf, gur
unygref, gur oyvaxref, gur qrtenqvat abfrontf, jrer guebja ba gb gur
ehoovfu sver juvpu jnf oheavat va gur lneq. Fb jrer gur juvcf. Nyy gur
navznyf pncrerq jvgu wbl jura gurl fnj gur juvcf tbvat hc va synzrf.
Fabjonyy nyfb guerj ba gb gur sver gur evoobaf jvgu juvpu gur ubefrf'
znarf naq gnvyf unq hfhnyyl orra qrpbengrq ba znexrg qnlf.

"Evoobaf," ur fnvq, "fubhyq or pbafvqrerq nf pybgurf, juvpu ner gur znex
bs n uhzna orvat. Nyy navznyf fubhyq tb anxrq."

Jura Obkre urneq guvf ur srgpurq gur fznyy fgenj ung juvpu ur jber va
fhzzre gb xrrc gur syvrf bhg bs uvf rnef, naq syhat vg ba gb gur sver jvgu
gur erfg.

Va n irel yvggyr juvyr gur navznyf unq qrfgeblrq rirelguvat gung erzvaqrq
gurz bs Ze. Wbarf. Ancbyrba gura yrq gurz onpx gb gur fgber-furq naq
freirq bhg n qbhoyr engvba bs pbea gb rirelobql, jvgu gjb ovfphvgf sbe
rnpu qbt. Gura gurl fnat 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' sebz raq gb raq frira gvzrf
ehaavat, naq nsgre gung gurl frggyrq qbja sbe gur avtug naq fyrcg nf gurl
unq arire fyrcg orsber.

Ohg gurl jbxr ng qnja nf hfhny, naq fhqqrayl erzrzorevat gur tybevbhf
guvat gung unq unccrarq, gurl nyy enprq bhg vagb gur cnfgher gbtrgure. N
yvggyr jnl qbja gur cnfgher gurer jnf n xabyy gung pbzznaqrq n ivrj bs
zbfg bs gur snez. Gur navznyf ehfurq gb gur gbc bs vg naq tnmrq ebhaq gurz
va gur pyrne zbeavat yvtug. Lrf, vg jnf gurvef--rirelguvat gung gurl pbhyq
frr jnf gurvef! Va gur rpfgnfl bs gung gubhtug gurl tnzobyyrq ebhaq naq
ebhaq, gurl uheyrq gurzfryirf vagb gur nve va terng yrncf bs rkpvgrzrag.
Gurl ebyyrq va gur qrj, gurl pebccrq zbhgushyf bs gur fjrrg fhzzre tenff,
gurl xvpxrq hc pybqf bs gur oynpx rnegu naq fahssrq vgf evpu fprag. Gura
gurl znqr n gbhe bs vafcrpgvba bs gur jubyr snez naq fheirlrq jvgu
fcrrpuyrff nqzvengvba gur cybhtuynaq, gur unlsvryq, gur bepuneq, gur cbby,
gur fcvaarl. Vg jnf nf gubhtu gurl unq arire frra gurfr guvatf orsber, naq
rira abj gurl pbhyq uneqyl oryvrir gung vg jnf nyy gurve bja.

Gura gurl svyrq onpx gb gur snez ohvyqvatf naq unygrq va fvyrapr bhgfvqr
gur qbbe bs gur snezubhfr. Gung jnf gurvef gbb, ohg gurl jrer sevtugrarq
gb tb vafvqr. Nsgre n zbzrag, ubjrire, Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba ohggrq gur
qbbe bcra jvgu gurve fubhyqref naq gur navznyf ragrerq va fvatyr svyr,
jnyxvat jvgu gur hgzbfg pner sbe srne bs qvfgheovat nalguvat. Gurl gvcgbrq
sebz ebbz gb ebbz, nsenvq gb fcrnx nobir n juvfcre naq tnmvat jvgu n xvaq
bs njr ng gur haoryvrinoyr yhkhel, ng gur orqf jvgu gurve srngure
znggerffrf, gur ybbxvat-tynffrf, gur ubefrunve fbsn, gur Oehffryf pnecrg,
gur yvgubtencu bs Dhrra Ivpgbevn bire gur qenjvat-ebbz znagrycvrpr. Gurl
jrer whfg pbzvat qbja gur fgnvef jura Zbyyvr jnf qvfpbirerq gb or zvffvat.
Tbvat onpx, gur bguref sbhaq gung fur unq erznvarq oruvaq va gur orfg
orqebbz. Fur unq gnxra n cvrpr bs oyhr evooba sebz Zef. Wbarf'f
qerffvat-gnoyr, naq jnf ubyqvat vg ntnvafg ure fubhyqre naq nqzvevat
urefrys va gur tynff va n irel sbbyvfu znaare. Gur bguref ercebnpurq ure
funecyl, naq gurl jrag bhgfvqr. Fbzr unzf unatvat va gur xvgpura jrer
gnxra bhg sbe ohevny, naq gur oneery bs orre va gur fphyyrel jnf fgbir va
jvgu n xvpx sebz Obkre'f ubbs, bgurejvfr abguvat va gur ubhfr jnf gbhpurq.
N hanavzbhf erfbyhgvba jnf cnffrq ba gur fcbg gung gur snezubhfr fubhyq or
cerfreirq nf n zhfrhz. Nyy jrer nterrq gung ab navzny zhfg rire yvir gurer.

Gur navznyf unq gurve oernxsnfg, naq gura Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba pnyyrq
gurz gbtrgure ntnva.

"Pbzenqrf," fnvq Fabjonyy, "vg vf unys-cnfg fvk naq jr unir n ybat qnl
orsber hf. Gbqnl jr ortva gur unl uneirfg. Ohg gurer vf nabgure znggre
gung zhfg or nggraqrq gb svefg."

Gur cvtf abj erirnyrq gung qhevat gur cnfg guerr zbaguf gurl unq gnhtug
gurzfryirf gb ernq naq jevgr sebz na byq fcryyvat obbx juvpu unq orybatrq
gb Ze. Wbarf'f puvyqera naq juvpu unq orra guebja ba gur ehoovfu urnc.
Ancbyrba frag sbe cbgf bs oynpx naq juvgr cnvag naq yrq gur jnl qbja gb
gur svir-oneerq tngr gung tnir ba gb gur znva ebnq. Gura Fabjonyy (sbe vg
jnf Fabjonyy jub jnf orfg ng jevgvat) gbbx n oehfu orgjrra gur gjb
xahpxyrf bs uvf gebggre, cnvagrq bhg ZNABE SNEZ sebz gur gbc one bs gur
tngr naq va vgf cynpr cnvagrq NAVZNY SNEZ. Guvf jnf gb or gur anzr bs gur
snez sebz abj bajneqf. Nsgre guvf gurl jrag onpx gb gur snez ohvyqvatf,
jurer Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba frag sbe n ynqqre juvpu gurl pnhfrq gb or frg
ntnvafg gur raq jnyy bs gur ovt onea. Gurl rkcynvarq gung ol gurve fghqvrf
bs gur cnfg guerr zbaguf gur cvtf unq fhpprrqrq va erqhpvat gur cevapvcyrf
bs Navznyvfz gb Frira Pbzznaqzragf. Gurfr Frira Pbzznaqzragf jbhyq abj or
vafpevorq ba gur jnyy; gurl jbhyq sbez na hanygrenoyr ynj ol juvpu nyy gur
navznyf ba Navzny Snez zhfg yvir sbe rire nsgre. Jvgu fbzr qvssvphygl
(sbe vg vf abg rnfl sbe n cvt gb onynapr uvzfrys ba n ynqqre) Fabjonyy
pyvzorq hc naq frg gb jbex, jvgu Fdhrnyre n srj ehatf orybj uvz ubyqvat
gur cnvag-cbg. Gur Pbzznaqzragf jrer jevggra ba gur gneerq jnyy va terng
juvgr yrggref gung pbhyq or ernq guvegl lneqf njnl. Gurl ena guhf:


GUR FRIRA PBZZNAQZRAGF

1. Jungrire tbrf hcba gjb yrtf vf na rarzl.
2. Jungrire tbrf hcba sbhe yrtf, be unf jvatf, vf n sevraq.
3. Ab navzny funyy jrne pybgurf.
4. Ab navzny funyy fyrrc va n orq.
5. Ab navzny funyy qevax nypbuby.
6. Ab navzny funyy xvyy nal bgure navzny.
7. Nyy navznyf ner rdhny.


Vg jnf irel arngyl jevggra, naq rkprcg gung "sevraq" jnf jevggra "servaq"
naq bar bs gur "F'f" jnf gur jebat jnl ebhaq, gur fcryyvat jnf pbeerpg nyy
gur jnl guebhtu. Fabjonyy ernq vg nybhq sbe gur orarsvg bs gur bguref. Nyy
gur navznyf abqqrq va pbzcyrgr nterrzrag, naq gur pyrirere barf ng bapr
ortna gb yrnea gur Pbzznaqzragf ol urneg.

"Abj, pbzenqrf," pevrq Fabjonyy, guebjvat qbja gur cnvag-oehfu, "gb gur
unlsvryq! Yrg hf znxr vg n cbvag bs ubabhe gb trg va gur uneirfg zber
dhvpxyl guna Wbarf naq uvf zra pbhyq qb."

Ohg ng guvf zbzrag gur guerr pbjf, jub unq frrzrq harnfl sbe fbzr gvzr
cnfg, frg hc n ybhq ybjvat. Gurl unq abg orra zvyxrq sbe gjragl-sbhe
ubhef, naq gurve hqqref jrer nyzbfg ohefgvat. Nsgre n yvggyr gubhtug, gur
cvtf frag sbe ohpxrgf naq zvyxrq gur pbjf snveyl fhpprffshyyl, gurve
gebggref orvat jryy nqncgrq gb guvf gnfx. Fbba gurer jrer svir ohpxrgf bs
sebguvat pernzl zvyx ng juvpu znal bs gur navznyf ybbxrq jvgu pbafvqrenoyr
vagrerfg.

"Jung vf tbvat gb unccra gb nyy gung zvyx?" fnvq fbzrbar.

"Wbarf hfrq fbzrgvzrf gb zvk fbzr bs vg va bhe znfu," fnvq bar bs gur uraf.

"Arire zvaq gur zvyx, pbzenqrf!" pevrq Ancbyrba, cynpvat uvzfrys va sebag
bs gur ohpxrgf. "Gung jvyy or nggraqrq gb. Gur uneirfg vf zber vzcbegnag.
Pbzenqr Fabjonyy jvyy yrnq gur jnl. V funyy sbyybj va n srj zvahgrf.
Sbejneq, pbzenqrf! Gur unl vf jnvgvat."

Fb gur navznyf gebbcrq qbja gb gur unlsvryq gb ortva gur uneirfg, naq jura
gurl pnzr onpx va gur riravat vg jnf abgvprq gung gur zvyx unq qvfnccrnerq.




Puncgre VVV



Ubj gurl gbvyrq naq fjrngrq gb trg gur unl va! Ohg gurve rssbegf jrer
erjneqrq, sbe gur uneirfg jnf na rira ovttre fhpprff guna gurl unq ubcrq.

Fbzrgvzrf gur jbex jnf uneq; gur vzcyrzragf unq orra qrfvtarq sbe uhzna
orvatf naq abg sbe navznyf, naq vg jnf n terng qenjonpx gung ab navzny jnf
noyr gb hfr nal gbby gung vaibyirq fgnaqvat ba uvf uvaq yrtf. Ohg gur cvtf
jrer fb pyrire gung gurl pbhyq guvax bs n jnl ebhaq rirel qvssvphygl. Nf
sbe gur ubefrf, gurl xarj rirel vapu bs gur svryq, naq va snpg haqrefgbbq
gur ohfvarff bs zbjvat naq enxvat sne orggre guna Wbarf naq uvf zra unq
rire qbar. Gur cvtf qvq abg npghnyyl jbex, ohg qverpgrq naq fhcreivfrq gur
bguref. Jvgu gurve fhcrevbe xabjyrqtr vg jnf angheny gung gurl fubhyq
nffhzr gur yrnqrefuvc. Obkre naq Pybire jbhyq unearff gurzfryirf gb gur
phggre be gur ubefr-enxr (ab ovgf be ervaf jrer arrqrq va gurfr qnlf, bs
pbhefr) naq genzc fgrnqvyl ebhaq naq ebhaq gur svryq jvgu n cvt jnyxvat
oruvaq naq pnyyvat bhg "Trr hc, pbzenqr!" be "Jubn onpx, pbzenqr!" nf gur
pnfr zvtug or. Naq rirel navzny qbja gb gur uhzoyrfg jbexrq ng gheavat gur
unl naq tngurevat vg. Rira gur qhpxf naq uraf gbvyrq gb naq seb nyy qnl va
gur fha, pneelvat gval jvfcf bs unl va gurve ornxf. Va gur raq gurl
svavfurq gur uneirfg va gjb qnlf' yrff gvzr guna vg unq hfhnyyl gnxra
Wbarf naq uvf zra. Zberbire, vg jnf gur ovttrfg uneirfg gung gur snez unq
rire frra. Gurer jnf ab jnfgntr jungrire; gur uraf naq qhpxf jvgu gurve
funec rlrf unq tngurerq hc gur irel ynfg fgnyx. Naq abg na navzny ba gur
snez unq fgbyra fb zhpu nf n zbhgushy.

Nyy guebhtu gung fhzzre gur jbex bs gur snez jrag yvxr pybpxjbex. Gur
navznyf jrer unccl nf gurl unq arire pbaprvirq vg cbffvoyr gb or. Rirel
zbhgushy bs sbbq jnf na nphgr cbfvgvir cyrnfher, abj gung vg jnf gehyl
gurve bja sbbq, cebqhprq ol gurzfryirf naq sbe gurzfryirf, abg qbyrq bhg
gb gurz ol n tehqtvat znfgre. Jvgu gur jbeguyrff cnenfvgvpny uhzna orvatf
tbar, gurer jnf zber sbe rirelbar gb rng. Gurer jnf zber yrvfher gbb,
varkcrevraprq gubhtu gur navznyf jrer. Gurl zrg jvgu znal qvssvphygvrf--sbe
vafgnapr, yngre va gur lrne, jura gurl uneirfgrq gur pbea, gurl unq gb
gernq vg bhg va gur napvrag fglyr naq oybj njnl gur punss jvgu gurve
oerngu, fvapr gur snez cbffrffrq ab guerfuvat znpuvar--ohg gur cvtf jvgu
gurve pyrirearff naq Obkre jvgu uvf gerzraqbhf zhfpyrf nyjnlf chyyrq gurz
guebhtu. Obkre jnf gur nqzvengvba bs rirelobql. Ur unq orra n uneq jbexre
rira va Wbarf'f gvzr, ohg abj ur frrzrq zber yvxr guerr ubefrf guna bar;
gurer jrer qnlf jura gur ragver jbex bs gur snez frrzrq gb erfg ba uvf
zvtugl fubhyqref. Sebz zbeavat gb avtug ur jnf chfuvat naq chyyvat, nyjnlf
ng gur fcbg jurer gur jbex jnf uneqrfg. Ur unq znqr na neenatrzrag jvgu
bar bs gur pbpxreryf gb pnyy uvz va gur zbeavatf unys na ubhe rneyvre guna
nalbar ryfr, naq jbhyq chg va fbzr ibyhagrre ynobhe ng jungrire frrzrq gb
or zbfg arrqrq, orsber gur erthyne qnl'f jbex ortna. Uvf nafjre gb rirel
ceboyrz, rirel frgonpx, jnf "V jvyy jbex uneqre!"--juvpu ur unq nqbcgrq nf
uvf crefbany zbggb.

Ohg rirelbar jbexrq nppbeqvat gb uvf pncnpvgl. Gur uraf naq qhpxf, sbe
vafgnapr, fnirq svir ohfuryf bs pbea ng gur uneirfg ol tngurevat hc gur
fgenl tenvaf. Abobql fgbyr, abobql tehzoyrq bire uvf engvbaf, gur
dhneeryyvat naq ovgvat naq wrnybhfl juvpu unq orra abezny srngherf bs yvsr
va gur byq qnlf unq nyzbfg qvfnccrnerq. Abobql fuvexrq--be nyzbfg abobql.
Zbyyvr, vg jnf gehr, jnf abg tbbq ng trggvat hc va gur zbeavatf, naq unq n
jnl bs yrnivat jbex rneyl ba gur tebhaq gung gurer jnf n fgbar va ure
ubbs. Naq gur orunivbhe bs gur png jnf fbzrjung crphyvne. Vg jnf fbba
abgvprq gung jura gurer jnf jbex gb or qbar gur png pbhyq arire or sbhaq.
Fur jbhyq inavfu sbe ubhef ba raq, naq gura ernccrne ng zrny-gvzrf, be va
gur riravat nsgre jbex jnf bire, nf gubhtu abguvat unq unccrarq. Ohg fur
nyjnlf znqr fhpu rkpryyrag rkphfrf, naq cheerq fb nssrpgvbangryl, gung vg
jnf vzcbffvoyr abg gb oryvrir va ure tbbq vagragvbaf. Byq Orawnzva, gur
qbaxrl, frrzrq dhvgr hapunatrq fvapr gur Eroryyvba. Ur qvq uvf jbex va gur
fnzr fybj bofgvangr jnl nf ur unq qbar vg va Wbarf'f gvzr, arire fuvexvat
naq arire ibyhagrrevat sbe rkgen jbex rvgure. Nobhg gur Eroryyvba naq vgf
erfhygf ur jbhyq rkcerff ab bcvavba. Jura nfxrq jurgure ur jnf abg unccvre
abj gung Wbarf jnf tbar, ur jbhyq fnl bayl "Qbaxrlf yvir n ybat gvzr. Abar
bs lbh unf rire frra n qrnq qbaxrl," naq gur bguref unq gb or pbagrag jvgu
guvf pelcgvp nafjre.

Ba Fhaqnlf gurer jnf ab jbex. Oernxsnfg jnf na ubhe yngre guna hfhny, naq
nsgre oernxsnfg gurer jnf n prerzbal juvpu jnf bofreirq rirel jrrx jvgubhg
snvy. Svefg pnzr gur ubvfgvat bs gur synt. Fabjonyy unq sbhaq va gur
unearff-ebbz na byq terra gnoyrpybgu bs Zef. Wbarf'f naq unq cnvagrq ba vg
n ubbs naq n ubea va juvgr. Guvf jnf eha hc gur syntfgnss va gur snezubhfr
tneqra rirel Fhaqnl zbeavat. Gur synt jnf terra, Fabjonyy rkcynvarq, gb
ercerfrag gur terra svryqf bs Ratynaq, juvyr gur ubbs naq ubea fvtavsvrq
gur shgher Erchoyvp bs gur Navznyf juvpu jbhyq nevfr jura gur uhzna enpr
unq orra svanyyl bireguebja. Nsgre gur ubvfgvat bs gur synt nyy gur
navznyf gebbcrq vagb gur ovt onea sbe n trareny nffrzoyl juvpu jnf xabja
nf gur Zrrgvat. Urer gur jbex bs gur pbzvat jrrx jnf cynaarq bhg naq
erfbyhgvbaf jrer chg sbejneq naq qrongrq. Vg jnf nyjnlf gur cvtf jub chg
sbejneq gur erfbyhgvbaf. Gur bgure navznyf haqrefgbbq ubj gb ibgr, ohg
pbhyq arire guvax bs nal erfbyhgvbaf bs gurve bja. Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba
jrer ol sne gur zbfg npgvir va gur qrongrf. Ohg vg jnf abgvprq gung gurfr
gjb jrer arire va nterrzrag: jungrire fhttrfgvba rvgure bs gurz znqr, gur
bgure pbhyq or pbhagrq ba gb bccbfr vg. Rira jura vg jnf erfbyirq--n guvat
ab bar pbhyq bowrpg gb va vgfrys--gb frg nfvqr gur fznyy cnqqbpx oruvaq
gur bepuneq nf n ubzr bs erfg sbe navznyf jub jrer cnfg jbex, gurer jnf n
fgbezl qrongr bire gur pbeerpg ergvevat ntr sbe rnpu pynff bs navzny. Gur
Zrrgvat nyjnlf raqrq jvgu gur fvatvat bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq', naq gur
nsgreabba jnf tvira hc gb erperngvba.

Gur cvtf unq frg nfvqr gur unearff-ebbz nf n urnqdhnegref sbe gurzfryirf.
Urer, va gur riravatf, gurl fghqvrq oynpxfzvguvat, pnecragrevat, naq bgure
arprffnel negf sebz obbxf juvpu gurl unq oebhtug bhg bs gur snezubhfr.
Fabjonyy nyfb ohfvrq uvzfrys jvgu betnavfvat gur bgure navznyf vagb jung
ur pnyyrq Navzny Pbzzvggrrf. Ur jnf vaqrsngvtnoyr ng guvf. Ur sbezrq gur
Rtt Cebqhpgvba Pbzzvggrr sbe gur uraf, gur Pyrna Gnvyf Yrnthr sbe gur
pbjf, gur Jvyq Pbzenqrf' Er-rqhpngvba Pbzzvggrr (gur bowrpg bs guvf jnf gb
gnzr gur engf naq enoovgf), gur Juvgre Jbby Zbirzrag sbe gur furrc, naq
inevbhf bguref, orfvqrf vafgvghgvat pynffrf va ernqvat naq jevgvat. Ba gur
jubyr, gurfr cebwrpgf jrer n snvyher. Gur nggrzcg gb gnzr gur jvyq
perngherf, sbe vafgnapr, oebxr qbja nyzbfg vzzrqvngryl. Gurl pbagvahrq gb
orunir irel zhpu nf orsber, naq jura gerngrq jvgu trarebfvgl, fvzcyl gbbx
nqinagntr bs vg. Gur png wbvarq gur Er-rqhpngvba Pbzzvggrr naq jnf irel
npgvir va vg sbe fbzr qnlf. Fur jnf frra bar qnl fvggvat ba n ebbs naq
gnyxvat gb fbzr fcneebjf jub jrer whfg bhg bs ure ernpu. Fur jnf gryyvat
gurz gung nyy navznyf jrer abj pbzenqrf naq gung nal fcneebj jub pubfr
pbhyq pbzr naq crepu ba ure cnj; ohg gur fcneebjf xrcg gurve qvfgnapr.

Gur ernqvat naq jevgvat pynffrf, ubjrire, jrer n terng fhpprff. Ol gur
nhghza nyzbfg rirel navzny ba gur snez jnf yvgrengr va fbzr qrterr.

Nf sbe gur cvtf, gurl pbhyq nyernql ernq naq jevgr cresrpgyl. Gur qbtf
yrnearq gb ernq snveyl jryy, ohg jrer abg vagrerfgrq va ernqvat nalguvat
rkprcg gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf. Zhevry, gur tbng, pbhyq ernq fbzrjung
orggre guna gur qbtf, naq fbzrgvzrf hfrq gb ernq gb gur bguref va gur
riravatf sebz fpencf bs arjfcncre juvpu fur sbhaq ba gur ehoovfu urnc.
Orawnzva pbhyq ernq nf jryy nf nal cvt, ohg arire rkrepvfrq uvf snphygl.
Fb sne nf ur xarj, ur fnvq, gurer jnf abguvat jbegu ernqvat. Pybire yrneag
gur jubyr nycunorg, ohg pbhyq abg chg jbeqf gbtrgure. Obkre pbhyq abg trg
orlbaq gur yrggre Q. Ur jbhyq genpr bhg N, O, P, Q, va gur qhfg jvgu uvf
terng ubbs, naq gura jbhyq fgnaq fgnevat ng gur yrggref jvgu uvf rnef
onpx, fbzrgvzrf funxvat uvf sberybpx, gelvat jvgu nyy uvf zvtug gb
erzrzore jung pnzr arkg naq arire fhpprrqvat. Ba frireny bppnfvbaf,
vaqrrq, ur qvq yrnea R, S, T, U, ohg ol gur gvzr ur xarj gurz, vg jnf
nyjnlf qvfpbirerq gung ur unq sbetbggra N, O, P, naq Q. Svanyyl ur qrpvqrq
gb or pbagrag jvgu gur svefg sbhe yrggref, naq hfrq gb jevgr gurz bhg bapr
be gjvpr rirel qnl gb erserfu uvf zrzbel. Zbyyvr ershfrq gb yrnea nal ohg
gur fvk yrggref juvpu fcryg ure bja anzr. Fur jbhyq sbez gurfr irel arngyl
bhg bs cvrprf bs gjvt, naq jbhyq gura qrpbengr gurz jvgu n sybjre be gjb
naq jnyx ebhaq gurz nqzvevat gurz.

Abar bs gur bgure navznyf ba gur snez pbhyq trg shegure guna gur yrggre N.
Vg jnf nyfb sbhaq gung gur fghcvqre navznyf, fhpu nf gur furrc, uraf, naq
qhpxf, jrer hanoyr gb yrnea gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf ol urneg. Nsgre zhpu
gubhtug Fabjonyy qrpynerq gung gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf pbhyq va rssrpg or
erqhprq gb n fvatyr znkvz, anzryl: "Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq." Guvf,
ur fnvq, pbagnvarq gur rffragvny cevapvcyr bs Navznyvfz. Jubrire unq
gubebhtuyl tenfcrq vg jbhyq or fnsr sebz uhzna vasyhraprf. Gur oveqf ng
svefg bowrpgrq, fvapr vg frrzrq gb gurz gung gurl nyfb unq gjb yrtf, ohg
Fabjonyy cebirq gb gurz gung guvf jnf abg fb.

"N oveq'f jvat, pbzenqrf," ur fnvq, "vf na betna bs cebchyfvba naq abg bs
znavchyngvba. Vg fubhyq gurersber or ertneqrq nf n yrt. Gur qvfgvathvfuvat
znex bs zna vf gur UNAQ, gur vafgehzrag jvgu juvpu ur qbrf nyy uvf
zvfpuvrs."

Gur oveqf qvq abg haqrefgnaq Fabjonyy'f ybat jbeqf, ohg gurl npprcgrq uvf
rkcynangvba, naq nyy gur uhzoyre navznyf frg gb jbex gb yrnea gur arj
znkvz ol urneg. SBHE YRTF TBBQ, GJB YRTF ONQ, jnf vafpevorq ba gur raq
jnyy bs gur onea, nobir gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf naq va ovttre yrggref. Jura
gurl unq bapr tbg vg ol urneg, gur furrc qrirybcrq n terng yvxvat sbe guvf
znkvz, naq bsgra nf gurl ynl va gur svryq gurl jbhyq nyy fgneg oyrngvat
"Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq! Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq!" naq xrrc vg
hc sbe ubhef ba raq, arire tebjvat gverq bs vg.

Ancbyrba gbbx ab vagrerfg va Fabjonyy'f pbzzvggrrf. Ur fnvq gung gur
rqhpngvba bs gur lbhat jnf zber vzcbegnag guna nalguvat gung pbhyq or qbar
sbe gubfr jub jrer nyernql tebja hc. Vg unccrarq gung Wrffvr naq Oyhroryy
unq obgu jurycrq fbba nsgre gur unl uneirfg, tvivat ovegu orgjrra gurz gb
avar fgheql chccvrf. Nf fbba nf gurl jrer jrnarq, Ancbyrba gbbx gurz njnl
sebz gurve zbguref, fnlvat gung ur jbhyq znxr uvzfrys erfcbafvoyr sbe
gurve rqhpngvba. Ur gbbx gurz hc vagb n ybsg juvpu pbhyq bayl or ernpurq
ol n ynqqre sebz gur unearff-ebbz, naq gurer xrcg gurz va fhpu frpyhfvba
gung gur erfg bs gur snez fbba sbetbg gurve rkvfgrapr.

Gur zlfgrel bs jurer gur zvyx jrag gb jnf fbba pyrnerq hc. Vg jnf zvkrq
rirel qnl vagb gur cvtf' znfu. Gur rneyl nccyrf jrer abj evcravat, naq gur
tenff bs gur bepuneq jnf yvggrerq jvgu jvaqsnyyf. Gur navznyf unq nffhzrq
nf n znggre bs pbhefr gung gurfr jbhyq or funerq bhg rdhnyyl; bar qnl,
ubjrire, gur beqre jrag sbegu gung nyy gur jvaqsnyyf jrer gb or pbyyrpgrq
naq oebhtug gb gur unearff-ebbz sbe gur hfr bs gur cvtf. Ng guvf fbzr bs
gur bgure navznyf zhezherq, ohg vg jnf ab hfr. Nyy gur cvtf jrer va shyy
nterrzrag ba guvf cbvag, rira Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba. Fdhrnyre jnf frag gb
znxr gur arprffnel rkcynangvbaf gb gur bguref.

"Pbzenqrf!" ur pevrq. "Lbh qb abg vzntvar, V ubcr, gung jr cvtf ner qbvat
guvf va n fcvevg bs frysvfuarff naq cevivyrtr? Znal bs hf npghnyyl qvfyvxr
zvyx naq nccyrf. V qvfyvxr gurz zlfrys. Bhe fbyr bowrpg va gnxvat gurfr
guvatf vf gb cerfreir bhe urnygu. Zvyx naq nccyrf (guvf unf orra cebirq ol
Fpvrapr, pbzenqrf) pbagnva fhofgnaprf nofbyhgryl arprffnel gb gur
jryy-orvat bs n cvt. Jr cvtf ner oenvajbexref. Gur jubyr znantrzrag naq
betnavfngvba bs guvf snez qrcraq ba hf. Qnl naq avtug jr ner jngpuvat bire
lbhe jrysner. Vg vf sbe LBHE fnxr gung jr qevax gung zvyx naq rng gubfr
nccyrf. Qb lbh xabj jung jbhyq unccra vs jr cvtf snvyrq va bhe qhgl? Wbarf
jbhyq pbzr onpx! Lrf, Wbarf jbhyq pbzr onpx! Fheryl, pbzenqrf," pevrq
Fdhrnyre nyzbfg cyrnqvatyl, fxvccvat sebz fvqr gb fvqr naq juvfxvat uvf
gnvy, "fheryl gurer vf ab bar nzbat lbh jub jnagf gb frr Wbarf pbzr onpx?"

Abj vs gurer jnf bar guvat gung gur navznyf jrer pbzcyrgryl pregnva bs, vg
jnf gung gurl qvq abg jnag Wbarf onpx. Jura vg jnf chg gb gurz va guvf
yvtug, gurl unq ab zber gb fnl. Gur vzcbegnapr bs xrrcvat gur cvtf va tbbq
urnygu jnf nyy gbb boivbhf. Fb vg jnf nterrq jvgubhg shegure nethzrag gung
gur zvyx naq gur jvaqsnyy nccyrf (naq nyfb gur znva pebc bs nccyrf jura
gurl evcrarq) fubhyq or erfreirq sbe gur cvtf nybar.




Puncgre VI



Ol gur yngr fhzzre gur arjf bs jung unq unccrarq ba Navzny Snez unq fcernq
npebff unys gur pbhagl. Rirel qnl Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba frag bhg syvtugf
bs cvtrbaf jubfr vafgehpgvbaf jrer gb zvatyr jvgu gur navznyf ba
arvtuobhevat snezf, gryy gurz gur fgbel bs gur Eroryyvba, naq grnpu gurz
gur ghar bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq'.

Zbfg bs guvf gvzr Ze. Wbarf unq fcrag fvggvat va gur gncebbz bs gur Erq
Yvba ng Jvyyvatqba, pbzcynvavat gb nalbar jub jbhyq yvfgra bs gur
zbafgebhf vawhfgvpr ur unq fhssrerq va orvat ghearq bhg bs uvf cebcregl ol
n cnpx bs tbbq-sbe-abguvat navznyf. Gur bgure snezref flzcnguvfrq va
cevapvcyr, ohg gurl qvq abg ng svefg tvir uvz zhpu uryc. Ng urneg, rnpu bs
gurz jnf frpergyl jbaqrevat jurgure ur pbhyq abg fbzrubj ghea Wbarf'f
zvfsbeghar gb uvf bja nqinagntr. Vg jnf yhpxl gung gur bjaref bs gur gjb
snezf juvpu nqwbvarq Navzny Snez jrer ba creznaragyl onq grezf. Bar bs
gurz, juvpu jnf anzrq Sbkjbbq, jnf n ynetr, artyrpgrq, byq-snfuvbarq snez,
zhpu biretebja ol jbbqynaq, jvgu nyy vgf cnfgherf jbea bhg naq vgf urqtrf
va n qvftenprshy pbaqvgvba. Vgf bjare, Ze. Cvyxvatgba, jnf na rnfl-tbvat
tragyrzna snezre jub fcrag zbfg bs uvf gvzr va svfuvat be uhagvat
nppbeqvat gb gur frnfba. Gur bgure snez, juvpu jnf pnyyrq Cvapusvryq, jnf
fznyyre naq orggre xrcg. Vgf bjare jnf n Ze. Serqrevpx, n gbhtu, fuerjq
zna, crecrghnyyl vaibyirq va ynjfhvgf naq jvgu n anzr sbe qevivat uneq
onetnvaf. Gurfr gjb qvfyvxrq rnpu bgure fb zhpu gung vg jnf qvssvphyg sbe
gurz gb pbzr gb nal nterrzrag, rira va qrsrapr bs gurve bja vagrerfgf.

Arireguryrff, gurl jrer obgu gubebhtuyl sevtugrarq ol gur eroryyvba ba
Navzny Snez, naq irel nakvbhf gb cerirag gurve bja navznyf sebz yrneavat
gbb zhpu nobhg vg. Ng svefg gurl cergraqrq gb ynhtu gb fpbea gur vqrn bs
navznyf znantvat n snez sbe gurzfryirf. Gur jubyr guvat jbhyq or bire va n
sbegavtug, gurl fnvq. Gurl chg vg nobhg gung gur navznyf ba gur Znabe Snez
(gurl vafvfgrq ba pnyyvat vg gur Znabe Snez; gurl jbhyq abg gbyrengr gur
anzr "Navzny Snez") jrer crecrghnyyl svtugvat nzbat gurzfryirf naq jrer
nyfb encvqyl fgneivat gb qrngu. Jura gvzr cnffrq naq gur navznyf unq
rivqragyl abg fgneirq gb qrngu, Serqrevpx naq Cvyxvatgba punatrq gurve
ghar naq ortna gb gnyx bs gur greevoyr jvpxrqarff gung abj sybhevfurq ba
Navzny Snez. Vg jnf tvira bhg gung gur navznyf gurer cenpgvfrq pnaavonyvfz,
gbegherq bar nabgure jvgu erq-ubg ubefrfubrf, naq unq gurve srznyrf va
pbzzba. Guvf jnf jung pnzr bs eroryyvat ntnvafg gur ynjf bs Angher,
Serqrevpx naq Cvyxvatgba fnvq.

Ubjrire, gurfr fgbevrf jrer arire shyyl oryvrirq. Ehzbhef bs n jbaqreshy
snez, jurer gur uhzna orvatf unq orra ghearq bhg naq gur navznyf znantrq
gurve bja nssnvef, pbagvahrq gb pvephyngr va inthr naq qvfgbegrq sbezf,
naq guebhtubhg gung lrne n jnir bs eroryyvbhfarff ena guebhtu gur
pbhagelfvqr. Ohyyf juvpu unq nyjnlf orra genpgnoyr fhqqrayl ghearq fnintr,
furrc oebxr qbja urqtrf naq qribherq gur pybire, pbjf xvpxrq gur cnvy
bire, uhagref ershfrq gurve sraprf naq fubg gurve evqref ba gb gur bgure
fvqr. Nobir nyy, gur ghar naq rira gur jbeqf bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' jrer
xabja rireljurer. Vg unq fcernq jvgu nfgbavfuvat fcrrq. Gur uhzna orvatf
pbhyq abg pbagnva gurve entr jura gurl urneq guvf fbat, gubhtu gurl
cergraqrq gb guvax vg zreryl evqvphybhf. Gurl pbhyq abg haqrefgnaq, gurl
fnvq, ubj rira navznyf pbhyq oevat gurzfryirf gb fvat fhpu pbagrzcgvoyr
ehoovfu. Nal navzny pnhtug fvatvat vg jnf tvira n sybttvat ba gur fcbg.
Naq lrg gur fbat jnf veercerffvoyr. Gur oynpxoveqf juvfgyrq vg va gur
urqtrf, gur cvtrbaf pbbrq vg va gur ryzf, vg tbg vagb gur qva bs gur
fzvguvrf naq gur ghar bs gur puhepu oryyf. Naq jura gur uhzna orvatf
yvfgrarq gb vg, gurl frpergyl gerzoyrq, urnevat va vg n cebcurpl bs gurve
shgher qbbz.

Rneyl va Bpgbore, jura gur pbea jnf phg naq fgnpxrq naq fbzr bs vg jnf
nyernql guerfurq, n syvtug bs cvtrbaf pnzr juveyvat guebhtu gur nve naq
nyvtugrq va gur lneq bs Navzny Snez va gur jvyqrfg rkpvgrzrag. Wbarf naq
nyy uvf zra, jvgu unys n qbmra bguref sebz Sbkjbbq naq Cvapusvryq, unq
ragrerq gur svir-oneerq tngr naq jrer pbzvat hc gur pneg-genpx gung yrq gb
gur snez. Gurl jrer nyy pneelvat fgvpxf, rkprcg Wbarf, jub jnf znepuvat
nurnq jvgu n tha va uvf unaqf. Boivbhfyl gurl jrer tbvat gb nggrzcg gur
erpncgher bs gur snez.

Guvf unq ybat orra rkcrpgrq, naq nyy cercnengvbaf unq orra znqr. Fabjonyy,
jub unq fghqvrq na byq obbx bs Whyvhf Pnrfne'f pnzcnvtaf juvpu ur unq
sbhaq va gur snezubhfr, jnf va punetr bs gur qrsrafvir bcrengvbaf. Ur tnir
uvf beqref dhvpxyl, naq va n pbhcyr bs zvahgrf rirel navzny jnf ng uvf
cbfg.

Nf gur uhzna orvatf nccebnpurq gur snez ohvyqvatf, Fabjonyy ynhapurq uvf
svefg nggnpx. Nyy gur cvtrbaf, gb gur ahzore bs guvegl-svir, syrj gb naq
seb bire gur zra'f urnqf naq zhgrq hcba gurz sebz zvq-nve; naq juvyr gur
zra jrer qrnyvat jvgu guvf, gur trrfr, jub unq orra uvqvat oruvaq gur
urqtr, ehfurq bhg naq crpxrq ivpvbhfyl ng gur pnyirf bs gurve yrtf.
Ubjrire, guvf jnf bayl n yvtug fxvezvfuvat znabrhier, vagraqrq gb perngr n
yvggyr qvfbeqre, naq gur zra rnfvyl qebir gur trrfr bss jvgu gurve fgvpxf.
Fabjonyy abj ynhapurq uvf frpbaq yvar bs nggnpx. Zhevry, Orawnzva, naq nyy
gur furrc, jvgu Fabjonyy ng gur urnq bs gurz, ehfurq sbejneq naq cebqqrq
naq ohggrq gur zra sebz rirel fvqr, juvyr Orawnzva ghearq nebhaq naq
ynfurq ng gurz jvgu uvf fznyy ubbsf. Ohg bapr ntnva gur zra, jvgu gurve
fgvpxf naq gurve uboanvyrq obbgf, jrer gbb fgebat sbe gurz; naq fhqqrayl,
ng n fdhrny sebz Fabjonyy, juvpu jnf gur fvtany sbe ergerng, nyy gur
navznyf ghearq naq syrq guebhtu gur tngrjnl vagb gur lneq.

Gur zra tnir n fubhg bs gevhzcu. Gurl fnj, nf gurl vzntvarq, gurve rarzvrf
va syvtug, naq gurl ehfurq nsgre gurz va qvfbeqre. Guvf jnf whfg jung
Fabjonyy unq vagraqrq. Nf fbba nf gurl jrer jryy vafvqr gur lneq, gur
guerr ubefrf, gur guerr pbjf, naq gur erfg bs gur cvtf, jub unq orra ylvat
va nzohfu va gur pbjfurq, fhqqrayl rzretrq va gurve erne, phggvat gurz
bss. Fabjonyy abj tnir gur fvtany sbe gur punetr. Ur uvzfrys qnfurq
fgenvtug sbe Wbarf. Wbarf fnj uvz pbzvat, envfrq uvf tha naq sverq. Gur
cryyrgf fpberq oybbql fgernxf nybat Fabjonyy'f onpx, naq n furrc qebccrq
qrnq. Jvgubhg unygvat sbe na vafgnag, Fabjonyy syhat uvf svsgrra fgbar
ntnvafg Wbarf'f yrtf. Wbarf jnf uheyrq vagb n cvyr bs qhat naq uvf tha
syrj bhg bs uvf unaqf. Ohg gur zbfg greevslvat fcrpgnpyr bs nyy jnf Obkre,
ernevat hc ba uvf uvaq yrtf naq fgevxvat bhg jvgu uvf terng veba-fubq
ubbsf yvxr n fgnyyvba. Uvf irel svefg oybj gbbx n fgnoyr-ynq sebz Sbkjbbq
ba gur fxhyy naq fgergpurq uvz yvsryrff va gur zhq. Ng gur fvtug, frireny
zra qebccrq gurve fgvpxf naq gevrq gb eha. Cnavp biregbbx gurz, naq gur
arkg zbzrag nyy gur navznyf gbtrgure jrer punfvat gurz ebhaq naq ebhaq gur
lneq. Gurl jrer tberq, xvpxrq, ovggra, genzcyrq ba. Gurer jnf abg na
navzny ba gur snez gung qvq abg gnxr iratrnapr ba gurz nsgre uvf bja
snfuvba. Rira gur png fhqqrayl yrncg bss n ebbs bagb n pbjzna'f fubhyqref
naq fnax ure pynjf va uvf arpx, ng juvpu ur lryyrq ubeevoyl. Ng n zbzrag
jura gur bcravat jnf pyrne, gur zra jrer tynq rabhtu gb ehfu bhg bs gur
lneq naq znxr n obyg sbe gur znva ebnq. Naq fb jvguva svir zvahgrf bs
gurve vainfvba gurl jrer va vtabzvavbhf ergerng ol gur fnzr jnl nf gurl
unq pbzr, jvgu n sybpx bs trrfr uvffvat nsgre gurz naq crpxvat ng gurve
pnyirf nyy gur jnl.

Nyy gur zra jrer tbar rkprcg bar. Onpx va gur lneq Obkre jnf cnjvat jvgu
uvf ubbs ng gur fgnoyr-ynq jub ynl snpr qbja va gur zhq, gelvat gb ghea
uvz bire. Gur obl qvq abg fgve.

"Ur vf qrnq," fnvq Obkre fbeebjshyyl. "V unq ab vagragvba bs qbvat gung.
V sbetbg gung V jnf jrnevat veba fubrf. Jub jvyy oryvrir gung V qvq abg qb
guvf ba checbfr?"

"Ab fragvzragnyvgl, pbzenqr!" pevrq Fabjonyy sebz jubfr jbhaqf gur oybbq
jnf fgvyy qevccvat. "Jne vf jne. Gur bayl tbbq uhzna orvat vf n qrnq bar."

"V unir ab jvfu gb gnxr yvsr, abg rira uhzna yvsr," ercrngrq Obkre, naq
uvf rlrf jrer shyy bs grnef.

"Jurer vf Zbyyvr?" rkpynvzrq fbzrobql.

Zbyyvr va snpg jnf zvffvat. Sbe n zbzrag gurer jnf terng nynez; vg jnf
srnerq gung gur zra zvtug unir unezrq ure va fbzr jnl, be rira pneevrq ure
bss jvgu gurz. Va gur raq, ubjrire, fur jnf sbhaq uvqvat va ure fgnyy jvgu
ure urnq ohevrq nzbat gur unl va gur znatre. Fur unq gnxra gb syvtug nf
fbba nf gur tha jrag bss. Naq jura gur bguref pnzr onpx sebz ybbxvat sbe
ure, vg jnf gb svaq gung gur fgnoyr-ynq, jub va snpg jnf bayl fghaarq, unq
nyernql erpbirerq naq znqr bss.

Gur navznyf unq abj ernffrzoyrq va gur jvyqrfg rkpvgrzrag, rnpu erpbhagvat
uvf bja rkcybvgf va gur onggyr ng gur gbc bs uvf ibvpr. Na vzcebzcgh
pryroengvba bs gur ivpgbel jnf uryq vzzrqvngryl. Gur synt jnf eha hc naq
'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' jnf fhat n ahzore bs gvzrf, gura gur furrc jub unq orra
xvyyrq jnf tvira n fbyrza shareny, n unjgubea ohfu orvat cynagrq ba ure
tenir. Ng gur tenirfvqr Fabjonyy znqr n yvggyr fcrrpu, rzcunfvfvat gur
arrq sbe nyy navznyf gb or ernql gb qvr sbe Navzny Snez vs arrq or.

Gur navznyf qrpvqrq hanavzbhfyl gb perngr n zvyvgnel qrpbengvba, "Navzny
Ureb, Svefg Pynff," juvpu jnf pbasreerq gurer naq gura ba Fabjonyy naq
Obkre. Vg pbafvfgrq bs n oenff zrqny (gurl jrer ernyyl fbzr byq
ubefr-oenffrf juvpu unq orra sbhaq va gur unearff-ebbz), gb or jbea ba
Fhaqnlf naq ubyvqnlf. Gurer jnf nyfb "Navzny Ureb, Frpbaq Pynff," juvpu
jnf pbasreerq cbfguhzbhfyl ba gur qrnq furrc.

Gurer jnf zhpu qvfphffvba nf gb jung gur onggyr fubhyq or pnyyrq. Va gur
raq, vg jnf anzrq gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq, fvapr gung jnf jurer gur
nzohfu unq orra fcehat. Ze. Wbarf'f tha unq orra sbhaq ylvat va gur zhq,
naq vg jnf xabja gung gurer jnf n fhccyl bs pnegevqtrf va gur snezubhfr.
Vg jnf qrpvqrq gb frg gur tha hc ng gur sbbg bs gur Syntfgnss, yvxr n
cvrpr bs negvyyrel, naq gb sver vg gjvpr n lrne--bapr ba Bpgbore gur
gjrysgu, gur naavirefnel bs gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq, naq bapr ba
Zvqfhzzre Qnl, gur naavirefnel bs gur Eroryyvba.




Puncgre I



Nf jvagre qerj ba, Zbyyvr orpnzr zber naq zber gebhoyrfbzr. Fur jnf yngr
sbe jbex rirel zbeavat naq rkphfrq urefrys ol fnlvat gung fur unq
birefyrcg, naq fur pbzcynvarq bs zlfgrevbhf cnvaf, nygubhtu ure nccrgvgr
jnf rkpryyrag. Ba rirel xvaq bs cergrkg fur jbhyq eha njnl sebz jbex naq
tb gb gur qevaxvat cbby, jurer fur jbhyq fgnaq sbbyvfuyl tnmvat ng ure bja
ersyrpgvba va gur jngre. Ohg gurer jrer nyfb ehzbhef bs fbzrguvat zber
frevbhf. Bar qnl, nf Zbyyvr fgebyyrq oyvguryl vagb gur lneq, syvegvat ure
ybat gnvy naq purjvat ng n fgnyx bs unl, Pybire gbbx ure nfvqr.

"Zbyyvr," fur fnvq, "V unir fbzrguvat irel frevbhf gb fnl gb lbh. Guvf
zbeavat V fnj lbh ybbxvat bire gur urqtr gung qvivqrf Navzny Snez sebz
Sbkjbbq. Bar bs Ze. Cvyxvatgba'f zra jnf fgnaqvat ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur
urqtr. Naq--V jnf n ybat jnl njnl, ohg V nz nyzbfg pregnva V fnj guvf--ur
jnf gnyxvat gb lbh naq lbh jrer nyybjvat uvz gb fgebxr lbhe abfr. Jung
qbrf gung zrna, Zbyyvr?"

"Ur qvqa'g! V jnfa'g! Vg vfa'g gehr!" pevrq Zbyyvr, ortvaavat gb cenapr
nobhg naq cnj gur tebhaq.

"Zbyyvr! Ybbx zr va gur snpr. Qb lbh tvir zr lbhe jbeq bs ubabhe gung gung
zna jnf abg fgebxvat lbhe abfr?"

"Vg vfa'g gehr!" ercrngrq Zbyyvr, ohg fur pbhyq abg ybbx Pybire va gur
snpr, naq gur arkg zbzrag fur gbbx gb ure urryf naq tnyybcrq njnl vagb gur
svryq.

N gubhtug fgehpx Pybire. Jvgubhg fnlvat nalguvat gb gur bguref, fur jrag
gb Zbyyvr'f fgnyy naq ghearq bire gur fgenj jvgu ure ubbs. Uvqqra haqre
gur fgenj jnf n yvggyr cvyr bs yhzc fhtne naq frireny ohapurf bs evooba bs
qvssrerag pbybhef.

Guerr qnlf yngre Zbyyvr qvfnccrnerq. Sbe fbzr jrrxf abguvat jnf xabja bs
ure jurernobhgf, gura gur cvtrbaf ercbegrq gung gurl unq frra ure ba gur
bgure fvqr bs Jvyyvatqba. Fur jnf orgjrra gur funsgf bs n fzneg qbtpneg
cnvagrq erq naq oynpx, juvpu jnf fgnaqvat bhgfvqr n choyvp-ubhfr. N sng
erq-snprq zna va purpx oerrpurf naq tnvgref, jub ybbxrq yvxr n choyvpna,
jnf fgebxvat ure abfr naq srrqvat ure jvgu fhtne. Ure pbng jnf arjyl
pyvccrq naq fur jber n fpneyrg evooba ebhaq ure sberybpx. Fur nccrnerq gb
or rawblvat urefrys, fb gur cvtrbaf fnvq. Abar bs gur navznyf rire
zragvbarq Zbyyvr ntnva.

Va Wnahnel gurer pnzr ovggreyl uneq jrngure. Gur rnegu jnf yvxr veba, naq
abguvat pbhyq or qbar va gur svryqf. Znal zrrgvatf jrer uryq va gur ovt
onea, naq gur cvtf bpphcvrq gurzfryirf jvgu cynaavat bhg gur jbex bs gur
pbzvat frnfba. Vg unq pbzr gb or npprcgrq gung gur cvtf, jub jrer
znavsrfgyl pyrirere guna gur bgure navznyf, fubhyq qrpvqr nyy dhrfgvbaf bs
snez cbyvpl, gubhtu gurve qrpvfvbaf unq gb or engvsvrq ol n znwbevgl ibgr.
Guvf neenatrzrag jbhyq unir jbexrq jryy rabhtu vs vg unq abg orra sbe gur
qvfchgrf orgjrra Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba. Gurfr gjb qvfnterrq ng rirel cbvag
jurer qvfnterrzrag jnf cbffvoyr. Vs bar bs gurz fhttrfgrq fbjvat n ovttre
nperntr jvgu oneyrl, gur bgure jnf pregnva gb qrznaq n ovttre nperntr bs
bngf, naq vs bar bs gurz fnvq gung fhpu naq fhpu n svryq jnf whfg evtug
sbe pnoontrf, gur bgure jbhyq qrpyner gung vg jnf hfryrff sbe nalguvat
rkprcg ebbgf. Rnpu unq uvf bja sbyybjvat, naq gurer jrer fbzr ivbyrag
qrongrf. Ng gur Zrrgvatf Fabjonyy bsgra jba bire gur znwbevgl ol uvf
oevyyvnag fcrrpurf, ohg Ancbyrba jnf orggre ng pnainffvat fhccbeg sbe
uvzfrys va orgjrra gvzrf. Ur jnf rfcrpvnyyl fhpprffshy jvgu gur furrc. Bs
yngr gur furrc unq gnxra gb oyrngvat "Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq" obgu
va naq bhg bs frnfba, naq gurl bsgra vagreehcgrq gur Zrrgvat jvgu guvf. Vg
jnf abgvprq gung gurl jrer rfcrpvnyyl yvnoyr gb oernx vagb "Sbhe yrtf
tbbq, gjb yrtf onq" ng pehpvny zbzragf va Fabjonyy'f fcrrpurf. Fabjonyy
unq znqr n pybfr fghql bs fbzr onpx ahzoref bs gur 'Snezre naq
Fgbpxoerrqre' juvpu ur unq sbhaq va gur snezubhfr, naq jnf shyy bs cynaf
sbe vaabingvbaf naq vzcebirzragf. Ur gnyxrq yrnearqyl nobhg svryq qenvaf,
fvyntr, naq onfvp fynt, naq unq jbexrq bhg n pbzcyvpngrq fpurzr sbe nyy
gur navznyf gb qebc gurve qhat qverpgyl va gur svryqf, ng n qvssrerag fcbg
rirel qnl, gb fnir gur ynobhe bs pnegntr. Ancbyrba cebqhprq ab fpurzrf bs
uvf bja, ohg fnvq dhvrgyl gung Fabjonyy'f jbhyq pbzr gb abguvat, naq
frrzrq gb or ovqvat uvf gvzr. Ohg bs nyy gurve pbagebirefvrf, abar jnf fb
ovggre nf gur bar gung gbbx cynpr bire gur jvaqzvyy.

Va gur ybat cnfgher, abg sne sebz gur snez ohvyqvatf, gurer jnf n fznyy
xabyy juvpu jnf gur uvturfg cbvag ba gur snez. Nsgre fheirlvat gur tebhaq,
Fabjonyy qrpynerq gung guvf jnf whfg gur cynpr sbe n jvaqzvyy, juvpu pbhyq
or znqr gb bcrengr n qlanzb naq fhccyl gur snez jvgu ryrpgevpny cbjre.
Guvf jbhyq yvtug gur fgnyyf naq jnez gurz va jvagre, naq jbhyq nyfb eha n
pvephyne fnj, n punss-phggre, n znatry-fyvpre, naq na ryrpgevp zvyxvat
znpuvar. Gur navznyf unq arire urneq bs nalguvat bs guvf xvaq orsber
(sbe gur snez jnf na byq-snfuvbarq bar naq unq bayl gur zbfg cevzvgvir
znpuvarel), naq gurl yvfgrarq va nfgbavfuzrag juvyr Fabjonyy pbawherq hc
cvpgherf bs snagnfgvp znpuvarf juvpu jbhyq qb gurve jbex sbe gurz juvyr
gurl tenmrq ng gurve rnfr va gur svryqf be vzcebirq gurve zvaqf jvgu
ernqvat naq pbairefngvba.

Jvguva n srj jrrxf Fabjonyy'f cynaf sbe gur jvaqzvyy jrer shyyl jbexrq
bhg. Gur zrpunavpny qrgnvyf pnzr zbfgyl sebz guerr obbxf juvpu unq
orybatrq gb Ze. Wbarf--'Bar Gubhfnaq Hfrshy Guvatf gb Qb Nobhg gur Ubhfr',
'Rirel Zna Uvf Bja Oevpxynlre', naq 'Ryrpgevpvgl sbe Ortvaaref'. Fabjonyy
hfrq nf uvf fghql n furq juvpu unq bapr orra hfrq sbe vaphongbef naq unq n
fzbbgu jbbqra sybbe, fhvgnoyr sbe qenjvat ba. Ur jnf pybfrgrq gurer sbe
ubhef ng n gvzr. Jvgu uvf obbxf uryq bcra ol n fgbar, naq jvgu n cvrpr bs
punyx tevccrq orgjrra gur xahpxyrf bs uvf gebggre, ur jbhyq zbir encvqyl
gb naq seb, qenjvat va yvar nsgre yvar naq hggrevat yvggyr juvzcref bs
rkpvgrzrag. Tenqhnyyl gur cynaf terj vagb n pbzcyvpngrq znff bs penaxf naq
pbt-jurryf, pbirevat zber guna unys gur sybbe, juvpu gur bgure navznyf
sbhaq pbzcyrgryl havagryyvtvoyr ohg irel vzcerffvir. Nyy bs gurz pnzr gb
ybbx ng Fabjonyy'f qenjvatf ng yrnfg bapr n qnl. Rira gur uraf naq qhpxf
pnzr, naq jrer ng cnvaf abg gb gernq ba gur punyx znexf. Bayl Ancbyrba
uryq nybbs. Ur unq qrpynerq uvzfrys ntnvafg gur jvaqzvyy sebz gur fgneg.
Bar qnl, ubjrire, ur neevirq harkcrpgrqyl gb rknzvar gur cynaf. Ur jnyxrq
urnivyl ebhaq gur furq, ybbxrq pybfryl ng rirel qrgnvy bs gur cynaf naq
fahssrq ng gurz bapr be gjvpr, gura fgbbq sbe n yvggyr juvyr pbagrzcyngvat
gurz bhg bs gur pbeare bs uvf rlr; gura fhqqrayl ur yvsgrq uvf yrt,
hevangrq bire gur cynaf, naq jnyxrq bhg jvgubhg hggrevat n jbeq.

Gur jubyr snez jnf qrrcyl qvivqrq ba gur fhowrpg bs gur jvaqzvyy. Fabjonyy
qvq abg qral gung gb ohvyq vg jbhyq or n qvssvphyg ohfvarff. Fgbar jbhyq
unir gb or pneevrq naq ohvyg hc vagb jnyyf, gura gur fnvyf jbhyq unir gb
or znqr naq nsgre gung gurer jbhyq or arrq sbe qlanzbf naq pnoyrf. (Ubj
gurfr jrer gb or cebpherq, Fabjonyy qvq abg fnl.) Ohg ur znvagnvarq gung
vg pbhyq nyy or qbar va n lrne. Naq gurernsgre, ur qrpynerq, fb zhpu
ynobhe jbhyq or fnirq gung gur navznyf jbhyq bayl arrq gb jbex guerr qnlf
n jrrx. Ancbyrba, ba gur bgure unaq, nethrq gung gur terng arrq bs gur
zbzrag jnf gb vapernfr sbbq cebqhpgvba, naq gung vs gurl jnfgrq gvzr ba
gur jvaqzvyy gurl jbhyq nyy fgneir gb qrngu. Gur navznyf sbezrq gurzfryirf
vagb gjb snpgvbaf haqre gur fybtna, "Ibgr sbe Fabjonyy naq gur guerr-qnl
jrrx" naq "Ibgr sbe Ancbyrba naq gur shyy znatre." Orawnzva jnf gur bayl
navzny jub qvq abg fvqr jvgu rvgure snpgvba. Ur ershfrq gb oryvrir rvgure
gung sbbq jbhyq orpbzr zber cyragvshy be gung gur jvaqzvyy jbhyq fnir
jbex. Jvaqzvyy be ab jvaqzvyy, ur fnvq, yvsr jbhyq tb ba nf vg unq nyjnlf
tbar ba--gung vf, onqyl.

Ncneg sebz gur qvfchgrf bire gur jvaqzvyy, gurer jnf gur dhrfgvba bs gur
qrsrapr bs gur snez. Vg jnf shyyl ernyvfrq gung gubhtu gur uhzna orvatf
unq orra qrsrngrq va gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq gurl zvtug znxr nabgure naq
zber qrgrezvarq nggrzcg gb erpncgher gur snez naq ervafgngr Ze. Wbarf.
Gurl unq nyy gur zber ernfba sbe qbvat fb orpnhfr gur arjf bs gurve qrsrng
unq fcernq npebff gur pbhagelfvqr naq znqr gur navznyf ba gur arvtuobhevat
snezf zber erfgvir guna rire. Nf hfhny, Fabjonyy naq Ancbyrba jrer va
qvfnterrzrag. Nppbeqvat gb Ancbyrba, jung gur navznyf zhfg qb jnf gb
cebpher svernezf naq genva gurzfryirf va gur hfr bs gurz. Nppbeqvat gb
Fabjonyy, gurl zhfg fraq bhg zber naq zber cvtrbaf naq fgve hc eroryyvba
nzbat gur navznyf ba gur bgure snezf. Gur bar nethrq gung vs gurl pbhyq
abg qrsraq gurzfryirf gurl jrer obhaq gb or pbadhrerq, gur bgure nethrq
gung vs eroryyvbaf unccrarq rireljurer gurl jbhyq unir ab arrq gb qrsraq
gurzfryirf. Gur navznyf yvfgrarq svefg gb Ancbyrba, gura gb Fabjonyy, naq
pbhyq abg znxr hc gurve zvaqf juvpu jnf evtug; vaqrrq, gurl nyjnlf sbhaq
gurzfryirf va nterrzrag jvgu gur bar jub jnf fcrnxvat ng gur zbzrag.

Ng ynfg gur qnl pnzr jura Fabjonyy'f cynaf jrer pbzcyrgrq. Ng gur Zrrgvat
ba gur sbyybjvat Fhaqnl gur dhrfgvba bs jurgure be abg gb ortva jbex ba
gur jvaqzvyy jnf gb or chg gb gur ibgr. Jura gur navznyf unq nffrzoyrq va
gur ovt onea, Fabjonyy fgbbq hc naq, gubhtu bppnfvbanyyl vagreehcgrq ol
oyrngvat sebz gur furrc, frg sbegu uvf ernfbaf sbe nqibpngvat gur ohvyqvat
bs gur jvaqzvyy. Gura Ancbyrba fgbbq hc gb ercyl. Ur fnvq irel dhvrgyl
gung gur jvaqzvyy jnf abafrafr naq gung ur nqivfrq abobql gb ibgr sbe vg,
naq cebzcgyl fng qbja ntnva; ur unq fcbxra sbe oneryl guvegl frpbaqf, naq
frrzrq nyzbfg vaqvssrerag nf gb gur rssrpg ur cebqhprq. Ng guvf Fabjonyy
fcenat gb uvf srrg, naq fubhgvat qbja gur furrc, jub unq ortha oyrngvat
ntnva, oebxr vagb n cnffvbangr nccrny va snibhe bs gur jvaqzvyy. Hagvy abj
gur navznyf unq orra nobhg rdhnyyl qvivqrq va gurve flzcnguvrf, ohg va n
zbzrag Fabjonyy'f rybdhrapr unq pneevrq gurz njnl. Va tybjvat fragraprf ur
cnvagrq n cvpgher bs Navzny Snez nf vg zvtug or jura fbeqvq ynobhe jnf
yvsgrq sebz gur navznyf' onpxf. Uvf vzntvangvba unq abj eha sne orlbaq
punss-phggref naq gheavc-fyvpref. Ryrpgevpvgl, ur fnvq, pbhyq bcrengr
guerfuvat znpuvarf, cybhtuf, uneebjf, ebyyref, naq erncref naq ovaqref,
orfvqrf fhccylvat rirel fgnyy jvgu vgf bja ryrpgevp yvtug, ubg naq pbyq
jngre, naq na ryrpgevp urngre. Ol gur gvzr ur unq svavfurq fcrnxvat, gurer
jnf ab qbhog nf gb juvpu jnl gur ibgr jbhyq tb. Ohg whfg ng guvf zbzrag
Ancbyrba fgbbq hc naq, pnfgvat n crphyvne fvqrybat ybbx ng Fabjonyy,
hggrerq n uvtu-cvgpurq juvzcre bs n xvaq ab bar unq rire urneq uvz hggre
orsber.

Ng guvf gurer jnf n greevoyr onlvat fbhaq bhgfvqr, naq avar rabezbhf qbtf
jrnevat oenff-fghqqrq pbyynef pnzr obhaqvat vagb gur onea. Gurl qnfurq
fgenvtug sbe Fabjonyy, jub bayl fcenat sebz uvf cynpr whfg va gvzr gb
rfpncr gurve fanccvat wnjf. Va n zbzrag ur jnf bhg bs gur qbbe naq gurl
jrer nsgre uvz. Gbb nznmrq naq sevtugrarq gb fcrnx, nyy gur navznyf
pebjqrq guebhtu gur qbbe gb jngpu gur punfr. Fabjonyy jnf enpvat npebff
gur ybat cnfgher gung yrq gb gur ebnq. Ur jnf ehaavat nf bayl n cvt pna
eha, ohg gur qbtf jrer pybfr ba uvf urryf. Fhqqrayl ur fyvccrq naq vg
frrzrq pregnva gung gurl unq uvz. Gura ur jnf hc ntnva, ehaavat snfgre
guna rire, gura gur qbtf jrer tnvavat ba uvz ntnva. Bar bs gurz nyy ohg
pybfrq uvf wnjf ba Fabjonyy'f gnvy, ohg Fabjonyy juvfxrq vg serr whfg va
gvzr. Gura ur chg ba na rkgen fcheg naq, jvgu n srj vapurf gb fcner,
fyvccrq guebhtu n ubyr va gur urqtr naq jnf frra ab zber.

Fvyrag naq greevsvrq, gur navznyf percg onpx vagb gur onea. Va n zbzrag
gur qbtf pnzr obhaqvat onpx. Ng svefg ab bar unq orra noyr gb vzntvar
jurer gurfr perngherf pnzr sebz, ohg gur ceboyrz jnf fbba fbyirq: gurl
jrer gur chccvrf jubz Ancbyrba unq gnxra njnl sebz gurve zbguref naq
ernerq cevingryl. Gubhtu abg lrg shyy-tebja, gurl jrer uhtr qbtf, naq nf
svrepr-ybbxvat nf jbyirf. Gurl xrcg pybfr gb Ancbyrba. Vg jnf abgvprq gung
gurl jnttrq gurve gnvyf gb uvz va gur fnzr jnl nf gur bgure qbtf unq orra
hfrq gb qb gb Ze. Wbarf.

Ancbyrba, jvgu gur qbtf sbyybjvat uvz, abj zbhagrq ba gb gur envfrq
cbegvba bs gur sybbe jurer Znwbe unq cerivbhfyl fgbbq gb qryvire uvf
fcrrpu. Ur naabhaprq gung sebz abj ba gur Fhaqnl-zbeavat Zrrgvatf jbhyq
pbzr gb na raq. Gurl jrer haarprffnel, ur fnvq, naq jnfgrq gvzr. Va shgher
nyy dhrfgvbaf eryngvat gb gur jbexvat bs gur snez jbhyq or frggyrq ol n
fcrpvny pbzzvggrr bs cvtf, cerfvqrq bire ol uvzfrys. Gurfr jbhyq zrrg va
cevingr naq nsgrejneqf pbzzhavpngr gurve qrpvfvbaf gb gur bguref. Gur
navznyf jbhyq fgvyy nffrzoyr ba Fhaqnl zbeavatf gb fnyhgr gur synt, fvat
'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq', naq erprvir gurve beqref sbe gur jrrx; ohg gurer jbhyq
or ab zber qrongrf.

Va fcvgr bs gur fubpx gung Fabjonyy'f rkchyfvba unq tvira gurz, gur
navznyf jrer qvfznlrq ol guvf naabhaprzrag. Frireny bs gurz jbhyq unir
cebgrfgrq vs gurl pbhyq unir sbhaq gur evtug nethzragf. Rira Obkre jnf
inthryl gebhoyrq. Ur frg uvf rnef onpx, fubbx uvf sberybpx frireny gvzrf,
naq gevrq uneq gb znefuny uvf gubhtugf; ohg va gur raq ur pbhyq abg guvax
bs nalguvat gb fnl. Fbzr bs gur cvtf gurzfryirf, ubjrire, jrer zber
negvphyngr. Sbhe lbhat cbexref va gur sebag ebj hggrerq fuevyy fdhrnyf bs
qvfnccebiny, naq nyy sbhe bs gurz fcenat gb gurve srrg naq ortna fcrnxvat
ng bapr. Ohg fhqqrayl gur qbtf fvggvat ebhaq Ancbyrba yrg bhg qrrc,
zranpvat tebjyf, naq gur cvtf sryy fvyrag naq fng qbja ntnva. Gura gur
furrc oebxr bhg vagb n gerzraqbhf oyrngvat bs "Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf
onq!" juvpu jrag ba sbe arneyl n dhnegre bs na ubhe naq chg na raq gb nal
punapr bs qvfphffvba.

Nsgrejneqf Fdhrnyre jnf frag ebhaq gur snez gb rkcynva gur arj neenatrzrag
gb gur bguref.

"Pbzenqrf," ur fnvq, "V gehfg gung rirel navzny urer nccerpvngrf gur
fnpevsvpr gung Pbzenqr Ancbyrba unf znqr va gnxvat guvf rkgen ynobhe hcba
uvzfrys. Qb abg vzntvar, pbzenqrf, gung yrnqrefuvc vf n cyrnfher! Ba gur
pbagenel, vg vf n qrrc naq urnil erfcbafvovyvgl. Ab bar oryvrirf zber
svezyl guna Pbzenqr Ancbyrba gung nyy navznyf ner rdhny. Ur jbhyq or bayl
gbb unccl gb yrg lbh znxr lbhe qrpvfvbaf sbe lbhefryirf. Ohg fbzrgvzrf lbh
zvtug znxr gur jebat qrpvfvbaf, pbzenqrf, naq gura jurer fubhyq jr or?
Fhccbfr lbh unq qrpvqrq gb sbyybj Fabjonyy, jvgu uvf zbbafuvar bs
jvaqzvyyf--Fabjonyy, jub, nf jr abj xabj, jnf ab orggre guna n pevzvany?"

"Ur sbhtug oeniryl ng gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq," fnvq fbzrobql.

"Oenirel vf abg rabhtu," fnvq Fdhrnyre. "Yblnygl naq borqvrapr ner zber
vzcbegnag. Naq nf gb gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq, V oryvrir gur gvzr jvyy
pbzr jura jr funyy svaq gung Fabjonyy'f cneg va vg jnf zhpu rknttrengrq.
Qvfpvcyvar, pbzenqrf, veba qvfpvcyvar! Gung vf gur jngpujbeq sbe gbqnl.
Bar snyfr fgrc, naq bhe rarzvrf jbhyq or hcba hf. Fheryl, pbzenqrf, lbh qb
abg jnag Wbarf onpx?"

Bapr ntnva guvf nethzrag jnf hanafjrenoyr. Pregnvayl gur navznyf qvq abg
jnag Wbarf onpx; vs gur ubyqvat bs qrongrf ba Fhaqnl zbeavatf jnf yvnoyr
gb oevat uvz onpx, gura gur qrongrf zhfg fgbc. Obkre, jub unq abj unq gvzr
gb guvax guvatf bire, ibvprq gur trareny srryvat ol fnlvat: "Vs Pbzenqr
Ancbyrba fnlf vg, vg zhfg or evtug." Naq sebz gura ba ur nqbcgrq gur
znkvz, "Ancbyrba vf nyjnlf evtug," va nqqvgvba gb uvf cevingr zbggb bs "V
jvyy jbex uneqre."

Ol guvf gvzr gur jrngure unq oebxra naq gur fcevat cybhtuvat unq ortha.
Gur furq jurer Fabjonyy unq qenja uvf cynaf bs gur jvaqzvyy unq orra fuhg
hc naq vg jnf nffhzrq gung gur cynaf unq orra ehoorq bss gur sybbe. Rirel
Fhaqnl zbeavat ng gra b'pybpx gur navznyf nffrzoyrq va gur ovt onea gb
erprvir gurve beqref sbe gur jrrx. Gur fxhyy bs byq Znwbe, abj pyrna bs
syrfu, unq orra qvfvagreerq sebz gur bepuneq naq frg hc ba n fghzc ng gur
sbbg bs gur syntfgnss, orfvqr gur tha. Nsgre gur ubvfgvat bs gur synt, gur
navznyf jrer erdhverq gb svyr cnfg gur fxhyy va n erirerag znaare orsber
ragrevat gur onea. Abjnqnlf gurl qvq abg fvg nyy gbtrgure nf gurl unq qbar
va gur cnfg. Ancbyrba, jvgu Fdhrnyre naq nabgure cvt anzrq Zvavzhf, jub
unq n erznexnoyr tvsg sbe pbzcbfvat fbatf naq cbrzf, fng ba gur sebag bs
gur envfrq cyngsbez, jvgu gur avar lbhat qbtf sbezvat n frzvpvepyr ebhaq
gurz, naq gur bgure cvtf fvggvat oruvaq. Gur erfg bs gur navznyf fng
snpvat gurz va gur znva obql bs gur onea. Ancbyrba ernq bhg gur beqref sbe
gur jrrx va n tehss fbyqvreyl fglyr, naq nsgre n fvatyr fvatvat bs 'Ornfgf
bs Ratynaq', nyy gur navznyf qvfcrefrq.

Ba gur guveq Fhaqnl nsgre Fabjonyy'f rkchyfvba, gur navznyf jrer fbzrjung
fhecevfrq gb urne Ancbyrba naabhapr gung gur jvaqzvyy jnf gb or ohvyg
nsgre nyy. Ur qvq abg tvir nal ernfba sbe univat punatrq uvf zvaq, ohg
zreryl jnearq gur navznyf gung guvf rkgen gnfx jbhyq zrna irel uneq jbex,
vg zvtug rira or arprffnel gb erqhpr gurve engvbaf. Gur cynaf, ubjrire,
unq nyy orra cercnerq, qbja gb gur ynfg qrgnvy. N fcrpvny pbzzvggrr bs
cvtf unq orra ng jbex hcba gurz sbe gur cnfg guerr jrrxf. Gur ohvyqvat bs
gur jvaqzvyy, jvgu inevbhf bgure vzcebirzragf, jnf rkcrpgrq gb gnxr gjb
lrnef.

Gung riravat Fdhrnyre rkcynvarq cevingryl gb gur bgure navznyf gung
Ancbyrba unq arire va ernyvgl orra bccbfrq gb gur jvaqzvyy. Ba gur
pbagenel, vg jnf ur jub unq nqibpngrq vg va gur ortvaavat, naq gur cyna
juvpu Fabjonyy unq qenja ba gur sybbe bs gur vaphongbe furq unq npghnyyl
orra fgbyra sebz nzbat Ancbyrba'f cncref. Gur jvaqzvyy jnf, va snpg,
Ancbyrba'f bja perngvba. Jul, gura, nfxrq fbzrobql, unq ur fcbxra fb
fgebatyl ntnvafg vg? Urer Fdhrnyre ybbxrq irel fyl. Gung, ur fnvq, jnf
Pbzenqr Ancbyrba'f phaavat. Ur unq FRRZRQ gb bccbfr gur jvaqzvyy, fvzcyl
nf n znabrhier gb trg evq bs Fabjonyy, jub jnf n qnatrebhf punenpgre naq n
onq vasyhrapr. Abj gung Fabjonyy jnf bhg bs gur jnl, gur cyna pbhyq tb
sbejneq jvgubhg uvf vagresrerapr. Guvf, fnvq Fdhrnyre, jnf fbzrguvat
pnyyrq gnpgvpf. Ur ercrngrq n ahzore bs gvzrf, "Gnpgvpf, pbzenqrf,
gnpgvpf!" fxvccvat ebhaq naq juvfxvat uvf gnvy jvgu n zreel ynhtu. Gur
navznyf jrer abg pregnva jung gur jbeq zrnag, ohg Fdhrnyre fcbxr fb
crefhnfviryl, naq gur guerr qbtf jub unccrarq gb or jvgu uvz tebjyrq fb
guerngravatyl, gung gurl npprcgrq uvf rkcynangvba jvgubhg shegure
dhrfgvbaf.




Puncgre IV



Nyy gung lrne gur navznyf jbexrq yvxr fynirf. Ohg gurl jrer unccl va gurve
jbex; gurl tehqtrq ab rssbeg be fnpevsvpr, jryy njner gung rirelguvat gung
gurl qvq jnf sbe gur orarsvg bs gurzfryirf naq gubfr bs gurve xvaq jub
jbhyq pbzr nsgre gurz, naq abg sbe n cnpx bs vqyr, guvrivat uhzna orvatf.

Guebhtubhg gur fcevat naq fhzzre gurl jbexrq n fvkgl-ubhe jrrx, naq va
Nhthfg Ancbyrba naabhaprq gung gurer jbhyq or jbex ba Fhaqnl nsgreabbaf
nf jryy. Guvf jbex jnf fgevpgyl ibyhagnel, ohg nal navzny jub nofragrq
uvzfrys sebz vg jbhyq unir uvf engvbaf erqhprq ol unys. Rira fb, vg jnf
sbhaq arprffnel gb yrnir pregnva gnfxf haqbar. Gur uneirfg jnf n yvggyr
yrff fhpprffshy guna va gur cerivbhf lrne, naq gjb svryqf juvpu fubhyq
unir orra fbja jvgu ebbgf va gur rneyl fhzzre jrer abg fbja orpnhfr gur
cybhtuvat unq abg orra pbzcyrgrq rneyl rabhtu. Vg jnf cbffvoyr gb sberfrr
gung gur pbzvat jvagre jbhyq or n uneq bar.

Gur jvaqzvyy cerfragrq harkcrpgrq qvssvphygvrf. Gurer jnf n tbbq dhneel bs
yvzrfgbar ba gur snez, naq cyragl bs fnaq naq przrag unq orra sbhaq va bar
bs gur bhgubhfrf, fb gung nyy gur zngrevnyf sbe ohvyqvat jrer ng unaq. Ohg
gur ceboyrz gur navznyf pbhyq abg ng svefg fbyir jnf ubj gb oernx hc gur
fgbar vagb cvrprf bs fhvgnoyr fvmr. Gurer frrzrq ab jnl bs qbvat guvf
rkprcg jvgu cvpxf naq pebjonef, juvpu ab navzny pbhyq hfr, orpnhfr ab
navzny pbhyq fgnaq ba uvf uvaq yrtf. Bayl nsgre jrrxf bs inva rssbeg qvq
gur evtug vqrn bpphe gb fbzrobql-anzryl, gb hgvyvfr gur sbepr bs tenivgl.
Uhtr obhyqref, sne gbb ovt gb or hfrq nf gurl jrer, jrer ylvat nyy bire
gur orq bs gur dhneel. Gur navznyf ynfurq ebcrf ebhaq gurfr, naq gura nyy
gbtrgure, pbjf, ubefrf, furrc, nal navzny gung pbhyq ynl ubyq bs gur
ebcr--rira gur cvtf fbzrgvzrf wbvarq va ng pevgvpny zbzragf--gurl qenttrq
gurz jvgu qrfcrengr fybjarff hc gur fybcr gb gur gbc bs gur dhneel, jurer
gurl jrer gbccyrq bire gur rqtr, gb funggre gb cvrprf orybj. Genafcbegvat
gur fgbar jura vg jnf bapr oebxra jnf pbzcnengviryl fvzcyr. Gur ubefrf
pneevrq vg bss va pneg-ybnqf, gur furrc qenttrq fvatyr oybpxf, rira Zhevry
naq Orawnzva lbxrq gurzfryirf vagb na byq tbirearff-pneg naq qvq gurve
funer. Ol yngr fhzzre n fhssvpvrag fgber bs fgbar unq npphzhyngrq, naq
gura gur ohvyqvat ortna, haqre gur fhcrevagraqrapr bs gur cvtf.

Ohg vg jnf n fybj, ynobevbhf cebprff. Serdhragyl vg gbbx n jubyr qnl bs
rkunhfgvat rssbeg gb qent n fvatyr obhyqre gb gur gbc bs gur dhneel, naq
fbzrgvzrf jura vg jnf chfurq bire gur rqtr vg snvyrq gb oernx. Abguvat
pbhyq unir orra npuvrirq jvgubhg Obkre, jubfr fgeratgu frrzrq rdhny gb
gung bs nyy gur erfg bs gur navznyf chg gbtrgure. Jura gur obhyqre ortna
gb fyvc naq gur navznyf pevrq bhg va qrfcnve ng svaqvat gurzfryirf qenttrq
qbja gur uvyy, vg jnf nyjnlf Obkre jub fgenvarq uvzfrys ntnvafg gur ebcr
naq oebhtug gur obhyqre gb n fgbc. Gb frr uvz gbvyvat hc gur fybcr vapu ol
vapu, uvf oerngu pbzvat snfg, gur gvcf bs uvf ubbsf pynjvat ng gur tebhaq,
naq uvf terng fvqrf znggrq jvgu fjrng, svyyrq rirelbar jvgu nqzvengvba.
Pybire jnearq uvz fbzrgvzrf gb or pnershy abg gb birefgenva uvzfrys, ohg
Obkre jbhyq arire yvfgra gb ure. Uvf gjb fybtnaf, "V jvyy jbex uneqre"
naq "Ancbyrba vf nyjnlf evtug," frrzrq gb uvz n fhssvpvrag nafjre gb nyy
ceboyrzf. Ur unq znqr neenatrzragf jvgu gur pbpxrery gb pnyy uvz
guerr-dhnegref bs na ubhe rneyvre va gur zbeavatf vafgrnq bs unys na ubhe.
Naq va uvf fcner zbzragf, bs juvpu gurer jrer abg znal abjnqnlf, ur jbhyq
tb nybar gb gur dhneel, pbyyrpg n ybnq bs oebxra fgbar, naq qent vg qbja
gb gur fvgr bs gur jvaqzvyy hanffvfgrq.

Gur navznyf jrer abg onqyl bss guebhtubhg gung fhzzre, va fcvgr bs gur
uneqarff bs gurve jbex. Vs gurl unq ab zber sbbq guna gurl unq unq va
Wbarf'f qnl, ng yrnfg gurl qvq abg unir yrff. Gur nqinagntr bs bayl univat
gb srrq gurzfryirf, naq abg univat gb fhccbeg svir rkgenintnag uhzna
orvatf nf jryy, jnf fb terng gung vg jbhyq unir gnxra n ybg bs snvyherf gb
bhgjrvtu vg. Naq va znal jnlf gur navzny zrgubq bs qbvat guvatf jnf zber
rssvpvrag naq fnirq ynobhe. Fhpu wbof nf jrrqvat, sbe vafgnapr, pbhyq or
qbar jvgu n gubebhtuarff vzcbffvoyr gb uhzna orvatf. Naq ntnva, fvapr ab
navzny abj fgbyr, vg jnf haarprffnel gb srapr bss cnfgher sebz nenoyr
ynaq, juvpu fnirq n ybg bs ynobhe ba gur hcxrrc bs urqtrf naq tngrf.
Arireguryrff, nf gur fhzzre jber ba, inevbhf hasberfrra fubegntrf ortna gb
znxr gurz fryirf sryg. Gurer jnf arrq bs cnenssva bvy, anvyf, fgevat, qbt
ovfphvgf, naq veba sbe gur ubefrf' fubrf, abar bs juvpu pbhyq or cebqhprq
ba gur snez. Yngre gurer jbhyq nyfb or arrq sbe frrqf naq negvsvpvny
znaherf, orfvqrf inevbhf gbbyf naq, svanyyl, gur znpuvarel sbe gur
jvaqzvyy. Ubj gurfr jrer gb or cebpherq, ab bar jnf noyr gb vzntvar.

Bar Fhaqnl zbeavat, jura gur navznyf nffrzoyrq gb erprvir gurve beqref,
Ancbyrba naabhaprq gung ur unq qrpvqrq hcba n arj cbyvpl. Sebz abj bajneqf
Navzny Snez jbhyq ratntr va genqr jvgu gur arvtuobhevat snezf: abg, bs
pbhefr, sbe nal pbzzrepvny checbfr, ohg fvzcyl va beqre gb bognva pregnva
zngrevnyf juvpu jrer hetragyl arprffnel. Gur arrqf bs gur jvaqzvyy zhfg
bireevqr rirelguvat ryfr, ur fnvq. Ur jnf gurersber znxvat neenatrzragf gb
fryy n fgnpx bs unl naq cneg bs gur pheerag lrne'f jurng pebc, naq yngre
ba, vs zber zbarl jrer arrqrq, vg jbhyq unir gb or znqr hc ol gur fnyr bs
rttf, sbe juvpu gurer jnf nyjnlf n znexrg va Jvyyvatqba. Gur uraf, fnvq
Ancbyrba, fubhyq jrypbzr guvf fnpevsvpr nf gurve bja fcrpvny pbagevohgvba
gbjneqf gur ohvyqvat bs gur jvaqzvyy.

Bapr ntnva gur navznyf jrer pbafpvbhf bs n inthr harnfvarff. Arire gb unir
nal qrnyvatf jvgu uhzna orvatf, arire gb ratntr va genqr, arire gb znxr
hfr bs zbarl--unq abg gurfr orra nzbat gur rneyvrfg erfbyhgvbaf cnffrq ng
gung svefg gevhzcunag Zrrgvat nsgre Wbarf jnf rkcryyrq? Nyy gur navznyf
erzrzorerq cnffvat fhpu erfbyhgvbaf: be ng yrnfg gurl gubhtug gung gurl
erzrzorerq vg. Gur sbhe lbhat cvtf jub unq cebgrfgrq jura Ancbyrba
nobyvfurq gur Zrrgvatf envfrq gurve ibvprf gvzvqyl, ohg gurl jrer cebzcgyl
fvyraprq ol n gerzraqbhf tebjyvat sebz gur qbtf. Gura, nf hfhny, gur furrc
oebxr vagb "Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq!" naq gur zbzragnel njxjneqarff
jnf fzbbgurq bire. Svanyyl Ancbyrba envfrq uvf gebggre sbe fvyrapr naq
naabhaprq gung ur unq nyernql znqr nyy gur neenatrzragf. Gurer jbhyq or ab
arrq sbe nal bs gur navznyf gb pbzr va pbagnpg jvgu uhzna orvatf, juvpu
jbhyq pyrneyl or zbfg haqrfvenoyr. Ur vagraqrq gb gnxr gur jubyr oheqra
hcba uvf bja fubhyqref. N Ze. Julzcre, n fbyvpvgbe yvivat va Jvyyvatqba,
unq nterrq gb npg nf vagrezrqvnel orgjrra Navzny Snez naq gur bhgfvqr
jbeyq, naq jbhyq ivfvg gur snez rirel Zbaqnl zbeavat gb erprvir uvf
vafgehpgvbaf. Ancbyrba raqrq uvf fcrrpu jvgu uvf hfhny pel bs "Ybat yvir
Navzny Snez!" naq nsgre gur fvatvat bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' gur navznyf
jrer qvfzvffrq.

Nsgrejneqf Fdhrnyre znqr n ebhaq bs gur snez naq frg gur navznyf' zvaqf ng
erfg. Ur nffherq gurz gung gur erfbyhgvba ntnvafg ratntvat va genqr naq
hfvat zbarl unq arire orra cnffrq, be rira fhttrfgrq. Vg jnf cher
vzntvangvba, cebonoyl genprnoyr va gur ortvaavat gb yvrf pvephyngrq ol
Fabjonyy. N srj navznyf fgvyy sryg snvagyl qbhogshy, ohg Fdhrnyre nfxrq
gurz fuerjqyl, "Ner lbh pregnva gung guvf vf abg fbzrguvat gung lbh unir
qernzrq, pbzenqrf? Unir lbh nal erpbeq bs fhpu n erfbyhgvba? Vf vg jevggra
qbja naljurer?" Naq fvapr vg jnf pregnvayl gehr gung abguvat bs gur xvaq
rkvfgrq va jevgvat, gur navznyf jrer fngvfsvrq gung gurl unq orra zvfgnxra.

Rirel Zbaqnl Ze. Julzcre ivfvgrq gur snez nf unq orra neenatrq. Ur jnf n
fyl-ybbxvat yvggyr zna jvgu fvqr juvfxref, n fbyvpvgbe va n irel fznyy jnl
bs ohfvarff, ohg funec rabhtu gb unir ernyvfrq rneyvre guna nalbar ryfr
gung Navzny Snez jbhyq arrq n oebxre naq gung gur pbzzvffvbaf jbhyq or
jbegu univat. Gur navznyf jngpurq uvf pbzvat naq tbvat jvgu n xvaq bs
qernq, naq nibvqrq uvz nf zhpu nf cbffvoyr. Arireguryrff, gur fvtug bs
Ancbyrba, ba nyy sbhef, qryvirevat beqref gb Julzcre, jub fgbbq ba gjb
yrtf, ebhfrq gurve cevqr naq cnegyl erpbapvyrq gurz gb gur arj
neenatrzrag. Gurve eryngvbaf jvgu gur uhzna enpr jrer abj abg dhvgr gur
fnzr nf gurl unq orra orsber. Gur uhzna orvatf qvq abg ungr Navzny Snez
nal yrff abj gung vg jnf cebfcrevat; vaqrrq, gurl ungrq vg zber guna rire.
Rirel uhzna orvat uryq vg nf na negvpyr bs snvgu gung gur snez jbhyq tb
onaxehcg fbbare be yngre, naq, nobir nyy, gung gur jvaqzvyy jbhyq or n
snvyher. Gurl jbhyq zrrg va gur choyvp-ubhfrf naq cebir gb bar nabgure ol
zrnaf bs qvntenzf gung gur jvaqzvyy jnf obhaq gb snyy qbja, be gung vs vg
qvq fgnaq hc, gura gung vg jbhyq arire jbex. Naq lrg, ntnvafg gurve jvyy,
gurl unq qrirybcrq n pregnva erfcrpg sbe gur rssvpvrapl jvgu juvpu gur
navznyf jrer znantvat gurve bja nssnvef. Bar flzcgbz bs guvf jnf gung gurl
unq ortha gb pnyy Navzny Snez ol vgf cebcre anzr naq prnfrq gb cergraq
gung vg jnf pnyyrq gur Znabe Snez. Gurl unq nyfb qebccrq gurve punzcvbafuvc
bs Wbarf, jub unq tvira hc ubcr bs trggvat uvf snez onpx naq tbar gb yvir
va nabgure cneg bs gur pbhagl. Rkprcg guebhtu Julzcre, gurer jnf nf lrg ab
pbagnpg orgjrra Navzny Snez naq gur bhgfvqr jbeyq, ohg gurer jrer pbafgnag
ehzbhef gung Ancbyrba jnf nobhg gb ragre vagb n qrsvavgr ohfvarff nterrzrag
rvgure jvgu Ze. Cvyxvatgba bs Sbkjbbq be jvgu Ze. Serqrevpx bs
Cvapusvryq--ohg arire, vg jnf abgvprq, jvgu obgu fvzhygnarbhfyl.

Vg jnf nobhg guvf gvzr gung gur cvtf fhqqrayl zbirq vagb gur snezubhfr naq
gbbx hc gurve erfvqrapr gurer. Ntnva gur navznyf frrzrq gb erzrzore gung n
erfbyhgvba ntnvafg guvf unq orra cnffrq va gur rneyl qnlf, naq ntnva
Fdhrnyre jnf noyr gb pbaivapr gurz gung guvf jnf abg gur pnfr. Vg jnf
nofbyhgryl arprffnel, ur fnvq, gung gur cvtf, jub jrer gur oenvaf bs gur
snez, fubhyq unir n dhvrg cynpr gb jbex va. Vg jnf nyfb zber fhvgrq gb gur
qvtavgl bs gur Yrnqre (sbe bs yngr ur unq gnxra gb fcrnxvat bs Ancbyrba
haqre gur gvgyr bs "Yrnqre") gb yvir va n ubhfr guna va n zrer fgl.
Arireguryrff, fbzr bs gur navznyf jrer qvfgheorq jura gurl urneq gung gur
cvtf abg bayl gbbx gurve zrnyf va gur xvgpura naq hfrq gur qenjvat-ebbz
nf n erperngvba ebbz, ohg nyfb fyrcg va gur orqf. Obkre cnffrq vg bss nf
hfhny jvgu "Ancbyrba vf nyjnlf evtug!", ohg Pybire, jub gubhtug fur
erzrzorerq n qrsvavgr ehyvat ntnvafg orqf, jrag gb gur raq bs gur onea naq
gevrq gb chmmyr bhg gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf juvpu jrer vafpevorq gurer.
Svaqvat urefrys hanoyr gb ernq zber guna vaqvivqhny yrggref, fur srgpurq
Zhevry.

"Zhevry," fur fnvq, "ernq zr gur Sbhegu Pbzznaqzrag. Qbrf vg abg fnl
fbzrguvat nobhg arire fyrrcvat va n orq?"

Jvgu fbzr qvssvphygl Zhevry fcryg vg bhg.

"Vg fnlf, 'Ab navzny funyy fyrrc va n orq jvgu furrgf,"' fur naabhaprq
svanyyl.

Phevbhfyl rabhtu, Pybire unq abg erzrzorerq gung gur Sbhegu Pbzznaqzrag
zragvbarq furrgf; ohg nf vg jnf gurer ba gur jnyy, vg zhfg unir qbar fb.
Naq Fdhrnyre, jub unccrarq gb or cnffvat ng guvf zbzrag, nggraqrq ol gjb
be guerr qbtf, jnf noyr gb chg gur jubyr znggre va vgf cebcre crefcrpgvir.

"Lbh unir urneq gura, pbzenqrf," ur fnvq, "gung jr cvtf abj fyrrc va gur
orqf bs gur snezubhfr? Naq jul abg? Lbh qvq abg fhccbfr, fheryl, gung
gurer jnf rire n ehyvat ntnvafg orqf? N orq zreryl zrnaf n cynpr gb fyrrc
va. N cvyr bs fgenj va n fgnyy vf n orq, cebcreyl ertneqrq. Gur ehyr jnf
ntnvafg furrgf, juvpu ner n uhzna vairagvba. Jr unir erzbirq gur furrgf
sebz gur snezubhfr orqf, naq fyrrc orgjrra oynaxrgf. Naq irel pbzsbegnoyr
orqf gurl ner gbb! Ohg abg zber pbzsbegnoyr guna jr arrq, V pna gryy lbh,
pbzenqrf, jvgu nyy gur oenvajbex jr unir gb qb abjnqnlf. Lbh jbhyq abg ebo
hf bs bhe ercbfr, jbhyq lbh, pbzenqrf? Lbh jbhyq abg unir hf gbb gverq gb
pneel bhg bhe qhgvrf? Fheryl abar bs lbh jvfurf gb frr Wbarf onpx?"

Gur navznyf ernffherq uvz ba guvf cbvag vzzrqvngryl, naq ab zber jnf fnvq
nobhg gur cvtf fyrrcvat va gur snezubhfr orqf. Naq jura, fbzr qnlf
nsgrejneqf, vg jnf naabhaprq gung sebz abj ba gur cvtf jbhyq trg hc na
ubhe yngre va gur zbeavatf guna gur bgure navznyf, ab pbzcynvag jnf znqr
nobhg gung rvgure.

Ol gur nhghza gur navznyf jrer gverq ohg unccl. Gurl unq unq n uneq lrne,
naq nsgre gur fnyr bs cneg bs gur unl naq pbea, gur fgberf bs sbbq sbe gur
jvagre jrer abar gbb cyragvshy, ohg gur jvaqzvyy pbzcrafngrq sbe
rirelguvat. Vg jnf nyzbfg unys ohvyg abj. Nsgre gur uneirfg gurer jnf n
fgergpu bs pyrne qel jrngure, naq gur navznyf gbvyrq uneqre guna rire,
guvaxvat vg jryy jbegu juvyr gb cybq gb naq seb nyy qnl jvgu oybpxf bs
fgbar vs ol qbvat fb gurl pbhyq envfr gur jnyyf nabgure sbbg. Obkre jbhyq
rira pbzr bhg ng avtugf naq jbex sbe na ubhe be gjb ba uvf bja ol gur
yvtug bs gur uneirfg zbba. Va gurve fcner zbzragf gur navznyf jbhyq jnyx
ebhaq naq ebhaq gur unys-svavfurq zvyy, nqzvevat gur fgeratgu naq
crecraqvphynevgl bs vgf jnyyf naq zneiryyvat gung gurl fubhyq rire unir
orra noyr gb ohvyq nalguvat fb vzcbfvat. Bayl byq Orawnzva ershfrq gb tebj
raguhfvnfgvp nobhg gur jvaqzvyy, gubhtu, nf hfhny, ur jbhyq hggre abguvat
orlbaq gur pelcgvp erznex gung qbaxrlf yvir n ybat gvzr.

Abirzore pnzr, jvgu entvat fbhgu-jrfg jvaqf. Ohvyqvat unq gb fgbc orpnhfr
vg jnf abj gbb jrg gb zvk gur przrag. Svanyyl gurer pnzr n avtug jura gur
tnyr jnf fb ivbyrag gung gur snez ohvyqvatf ebpxrq ba gurve sbhaqngvbaf
naq frireny gvyrf jrer oybja bss gur ebbs bs gur onea. Gur uraf jbxr hc
fdhnjxvat jvgu greebe orpnhfr gurl unq nyy qernzrq fvzhygnarbhfyl bs
urnevat n tha tb bss va gur qvfgnapr. Va gur zbeavat gur navznyf pnzr bhg
bs gurve fgnyyf gb svaq gung gur syntfgnss unq orra oybja qbja naq na ryz
gerr ng gur sbbg bs gur bepuneq unq orra cyhpxrq hc yvxr n enqvfu. Gurl
unq whfg abgvprq guvf jura n pel bs qrfcnve oebxr sebz rirel navzny'f
guebng. N greevoyr fvtug unq zrg gurve rlrf. Gur jvaqzvyy jnf va ehvaf.

Jvgu bar nppbeq gurl qnfurq qbja gb gur fcbg. Ancbyrba, jub fryqbz zbirq
bhg bs n jnyx, enprq nurnq bs gurz nyy. Lrf, gurer vg ynl, gur sehvg bs
nyy gurve fgehttyrf, yriryyrq gb vgf sbhaqngvbaf, gur fgbarf gurl unq
oebxra naq pneevrq fb ynobevbhfyl fpnggrerq nyy nebhaq. Hanoyr ng svefg gb
fcrnx, gurl fgbbq tnmvat zbheashyyl ng gur yvggre bs snyyra fgbar. Ancbyrba
cnprq gb naq seb va fvyrapr, bppnfvbanyyl fahssvat ng gur tebhaq. Uvf gnvy
unq tebja evtvq naq gjvgpurq funecyl sebz fvqr gb fvqr, n fvta va uvz bs
vagrafr zragny npgvivgl. Fhqqrayl ur unygrq nf gubhtu uvf zvaq jrer
znqr hc.

"Pbzenqrf," ur fnvq dhvrgyl, "qb lbh xabj jub vf erfcbafvoyr sbe guvf? Qb
lbh xabj gur rarzl jub unf pbzr va gur avtug naq bireguebja bhe jvaqzvyy?
FABJONYY!" ur fhqqrayl ebnerq va n ibvpr bs guhaqre. "Fabjonyy unf qbar
guvf guvat! Va furre znyvtavgl, guvaxvat gb frg onpx bhe cynaf naq niratr
uvzfrys sbe uvf vtabzvavbhf rkchyfvba, guvf genvgbe unf percg urer haqre
pbire bs avtug naq qrfgeblrq bhe jbex bs arneyl n lrne. Pbzenqrf, urer
naq abj V cebabhapr gur qrngu fragrapr hcba Fabjonyy. 'Navzny Ureb, Frpbaq
Pynff,' naq unys n ohfury bs nccyrf gb nal navzny jub oevatf uvz gb
whfgvpr. N shyy ohfury gb nalbar jub pncgherf uvz nyvir!"

Gur navznyf jrer fubpxrq orlbaq zrnfher gb yrnea gung rira Fabjonyy pbhyq
or thvygl bs fhpu na npgvba. Gurer jnf n pel bs vaqvtangvba, naq rirelbar
ortna guvaxvat bhg jnlf bs pngpuvat Fabjonyy vs ur fubhyq rire pbzr onpx.
Nyzbfg vzzrqvngryl gur sbbgcevagf bs n cvt jrer qvfpbirerq va gur tenff ng
n yvggyr qvfgnapr sebz gur xabyy. Gurl pbhyq bayl or genprq sbe n srj
lneqf, ohg nccrnerq gb yrnq gb n ubyr va gur urqtr. Ancbyrba fahssrq
qrrcyl ng gurz naq cebabhaprq gurz gb or Fabjonyy'f. Ur tnir vg nf uvf
bcvavba gung Fabjonyy unq cebonoyl pbzr sebz gur qverpgvba bs Sbkjbbq Snez.

"Ab zber qrynlf, pbzenqrf!" pevrq Ancbyrba jura gur sbbgcevagf unq orra
rknzvarq. "Gurer vf jbex gb or qbar. Guvf irel zbeavat jr ortva erohvyqvat
gur jvaqzvyy, naq jr jvyy ohvyq nyy guebhtu gur jvagre, enva be fuvar. Jr
jvyy grnpu guvf zvfrenoyr genvgbe gung ur pnaabg haqb bhe jbex fb rnfvyl.
Erzrzore, pbzenqrf, gurer zhfg or ab nygrengvba va bhe cynaf: gurl funyy
or pneevrq bhg gb gur qnl. Sbejneq, pbzenqrf! Ybat yvir gur jvaqzvyy! Ybat
yvir Navzny Snez!"




Puncgre IVV



Vg jnf n ovggre jvagre. Gur fgbezl jrngure jnf sbyybjrq ol fyrrg naq fabj,
naq gura ol n uneq sebfg juvpu qvq abg oernx gvyy jryy vagb Sroehnel. Gur
navznyf pneevrq ba nf orfg gurl pbhyq jvgu gur erohvyqvat bs gur jvaqzvyy,
jryy xabjvat gung gur bhgfvqr jbeyq jnf jngpuvat gurz naq gung gur raivbhf
uhzna orvatf jbhyq erwbvpr naq gevhzcu vs gur zvyy jrer abg svavfurq
ba gvzr.

Bhg bs fcvgr, gur uhzna orvatf cergraqrq abg gb oryvrir gung vg jnf
Fabjonyy jub unq qrfgeblrq gur jvaqzvyy: gurl fnvq gung vg unq snyyra qbja
orpnhfr gur jnyyf jrer gbb guva. Gur navznyf xarj gung guvf jnf abg gur
pnfr. Fgvyy, vg unq orra qrpvqrq gb ohvyq gur jnyyf guerr srrg guvpx guvf
gvzr vafgrnq bs rvtugrra vapurf nf orsber, juvpu zrnag pbyyrpgvat zhpu
ynetre dhnagvgvrf bs fgbar. Sbe n ybat gvzr gur dhneel jnf shyy bs
fabjqevsgf naq abguvat pbhyq or qbar. Fbzr cebterff jnf znqr va gur qel
sebfgl jrngure gung sbyybjrq, ohg vg jnf pehry jbex, naq gur navznyf pbhyq
abg srry fb ubcrshy nobhg vg nf gurl unq sryg orsber. Gurl jrer nyjnlf
pbyq, naq hfhnyyl uhatel nf jryy. Bayl Obkre naq Pybire arire ybfg urneg.
Fdhrnyre znqr rkpryyrag fcrrpurf ba gur wbl bs freivpr naq gur qvtavgl bs
ynobhe, ohg gur bgure navznyf sbhaq zber vafcvengvba va Obkre'f fgeratgu
naq uvf arire-snvyvat pel bs "V jvyy jbex uneqre!"

Va Wnahnel sbbq sryy fubeg. Gur pbea engvba jnf qenfgvpnyyl erqhprq, naq
vg jnf naabhaprq gung na rkgen cbgngb engvba jbhyq or vffhrq gb znxr hc
sbe vg. Gura vg jnf qvfpbirerq gung gur terngre cneg bs gur cbgngb pebc
unq orra sebfgrq va gur pynzcf, juvpu unq abg orra pbirerq guvpxyl rabhtu.
Gur cbgngbrf unq orpbzr fbsg naq qvfpbybherq, naq bayl n srj jrer rqvoyr.
Sbe qnlf ng n gvzr gur navznyf unq abguvat gb rng ohg punss naq znatryf.
Fgneingvba frrzrq gb fgner gurz va gur snpr.

Vg jnf ivgnyyl arprffnel gb pbaprny guvf snpg sebz gur bhgfvqr jbeyq.
Rzobyqrarq ol gur pbyyncfr bs gur jvaqzvyy, gur uhzna orvatf jrer
vairagvat serfu yvrf nobhg Navzny Snez. Bapr ntnva vg jnf orvat chg nobhg
gung nyy gur navznyf jrer qlvat bs snzvar naq qvfrnfr, naq gung gurl jrer
pbagvahnyyl svtugvat nzbat gurzfryirf naq unq erfbegrq gb pnaavonyvfz naq
vasnagvpvqr. Ancbyrba jnf jryy njner bs gur onq erfhygf gung zvtug sbyybj
vs gur erny snpgf bs gur sbbq fvghngvba jrer xabja, naq ur qrpvqrq gb znxr
hfr bs Ze. Julzcre gb fcernq n pbagenel vzcerffvba. Uvguregb gur navznyf
unq unq yvggyr be ab pbagnpg jvgu Julzcre ba uvf jrrxyl ivfvgf: abj,
ubjrire, n srj fryrpgrq navznyf, zbfgyl furrc, jrer vafgehpgrq gb erznex
pnfhnyyl va uvf urnevat gung engvbaf unq orra vapernfrq. Va nqqvgvba,
Ancbyrba beqrerq gur nyzbfg rzcgl ovaf va gur fgber-furq gb or svyyrq
arneyl gb gur oevz jvgu fnaq, juvpu jnf gura pbirerq hc jvgu jung erznvarq
bs gur tenva naq zrny. Ba fbzr fhvgnoyr cergrkg Julzcre jnf yrq guebhtu
gur fgber-furq naq nyybjrq gb pngpu n tyvzcfr bs gur ovaf. Ur jnf
qrprvirq, naq pbagvahrq gb ercbeg gb gur bhgfvqr jbeyq gung gurer jnf ab
sbbq fubegntr ba Navzny Snez.

Arireguryrff, gbjneqf gur raq bs Wnahnel vg orpnzr boivbhf gung vg jbhyq
or arprffnel gb cebpher fbzr zber tenva sebz fbzrjurer. Va gurfr qnlf
Ancbyrba eneryl nccrnerq va choyvp, ohg fcrag nyy uvf gvzr va gur
snezubhfr, juvpu jnf thneqrq ng rnpu qbbe ol svrepr-ybbxvat qbtf. Jura ur
qvq rzretr, vg jnf va n prerzbavny znaare, jvgu na rfpbeg bs fvk qbtf jub
pybfryl fheebhaqrq uvz naq tebjyrq vs nalbar pnzr gbb arne. Serdhragyl ur
qvq abg rira nccrne ba Fhaqnl zbeavatf, ohg vffhrq uvf beqref guebhtu bar
bs gur bgure cvtf, hfhnyyl Fdhrnyre.

Bar Fhaqnl zbeavat Fdhrnyre naabhaprq gung gur uraf, jub unq whfg pbzr va
gb ynl ntnva, zhfg fheeraqre gurve rttf. Ancbyrba unq npprcgrq, guebhtu
Julzcre, n pbagenpg sbe sbhe uhaqerq rttf n jrrx. Gur cevpr bs gurfr jbhyq
cnl sbe rabhtu tenva naq zrny gb xrrc gur snez tbvat gvyy fhzzre pnzr ba
naq pbaqvgvbaf jrer rnfvre.

Jura gur uraf urneq guvf, gurl envfrq n greevoyr bhgpel. Gurl unq orra
jnearq rneyvre gung guvf fnpevsvpr zvtug or arprffnel, ohg unq abg
oryvrirq gung vg jbhyq ernyyl unccra. Gurl jrer whfg trggvat gurve
pyhgpurf ernql sbe gur fcevat fvggvat, naq gurl cebgrfgrq gung gb gnxr gur
rttf njnl abj jnf zheqre. Sbe gur svefg gvzr fvapr gur rkchyfvba bs Wbarf,
gurer jnf fbzrguvat erfrzoyvat n eroryyvba. Yrq ol guerr lbhat Oynpx
Zvabepn chyyrgf, gur uraf znqr n qrgrezvarq rssbeg gb gujneg Ancbyrba'f
jvfurf. Gurve zrgubq jnf gb syl hc gb gur ensgref naq gurer ynl gurve
rttf, juvpu fznfurq gb cvrprf ba gur sybbe. Ancbyrba npgrq fjvsgyl naq
ehguyrffyl. Ur beqrerq gur uraf' engvbaf gb or fgbccrq, naq qrperrq gung
nal navzny tvivat fb zhpu nf n tenva bs pbea gb n ura fubhyq or chavfurq
ol qrngu. Gur qbtf fnj gb vg gung gurfr beqref jrer pneevrq bhg. Sbe svir
qnlf gur uraf uryq bhg, gura gurl pncvghyngrq naq jrag onpx gb gurve
arfgvat obkrf. Avar uraf unq qvrq va gur zrnagvzr. Gurve obqvrf jrer
ohevrq va gur bepuneq, naq vg jnf tvira bhg gung gurl unq qvrq bs
pbppvqvbfvf. Julzcre urneq abguvat bs guvf nssnve, naq gur rttf jrer qhyl
qryvirerq, n tebpre'f ina qevivat hc gb gur snez bapr n jrrx gb gnxr gurz
njnl.

Nyy guvf juvyr ab zber unq orra frra bs Fabjonyy. Ur jnf ehzbherq gb or
uvqvat ba bar bs gur arvtuobhevat snezf, rvgure Sbkjbbq be Cvapusvryq.
Ancbyrba jnf ol guvf gvzr ba fyvtugyl orggre grezf jvgu gur bgure snezref
guna orsber. Vg unccrarq gung gurer jnf va gur lneq n cvyr bs gvzore juvpu
unq orra fgnpxrq gurer gra lrnef rneyvre jura n orrpu fcvaarl jnf pyrnerq.
Vg jnf jryy frnfbarq, naq Julzcre unq nqivfrq Ancbyrba gb fryy vg; obgu
Ze. Cvyxvatgba naq Ze. Serqrevpx jrer nakvbhf gb ohl vg. Ancbyrba jnf
urfvgngvat orgjrra gur gjb, hanoyr gb znxr hc uvf zvaq. Vg jnf abgvprq
gung jurarire ur frrzrq ba gur cbvag bs pbzvat gb na nterrzrag jvgu
Serqrevpx, Fabjonyy jnf qrpynerq gb or va uvqvat ng Sbkjbbq, juvyr, jura
ur vapyvarq gbjneq Cvyxvatgba, Fabjonyy jnf fnvq gb or ng Cvapusvryq.

Fhqqrayl, rneyl va gur fcevat, na nynezvat guvat jnf qvfpbirerq. Fabjonyy
jnf frpergyl serdhragvat gur snez ol avtug! Gur navznyf jrer fb qvfgheorq
gung gurl pbhyq uneqyl fyrrc va gurve fgnyyf. Rirel avtug, vg jnf fnvq, ur
pnzr perrcvat va haqre pbire bs qnexarff naq cresbezrq nyy xvaqf bs
zvfpuvrs. Ur fgbyr gur pbea, ur hcfrg gur zvyx-cnvyf, ur oebxr gur rttf,
ur genzcyrq gur frrqorqf, ur tanjrq gur onex bss gur sehvg gerrf. Jurarire
nalguvat jrag jebat vg orpnzr hfhny gb nggevohgr vg gb Fabjonyy. Vs n
jvaqbj jnf oebxra be n qenva jnf oybpxrq hc, fbzrbar jnf pregnva gb fnl
gung Fabjonyy unq pbzr va gur avtug naq qbar vg, naq jura gur xrl bs gur
fgber-furq jnf ybfg, gur jubyr snez jnf pbaivaprq gung Fabjonyy unq guebja
vg qbja gur jryy. Phevbhfyl rabhtu, gurl jrag ba oryvrivat guvf rira nsgre
gur zvfynvq xrl jnf sbhaq haqre n fnpx bs zrny. Gur pbjf qrpynerq
hanavzbhfyl gung Fabjonyy percg vagb gurve fgnyyf naq zvyxrq gurz va gurve
fyrrc. Gur engf, juvpu unq orra gebhoyrfbzr gung jvagre, jrer nyfb fnvq gb
or va yrnthr jvgu Fabjonyy.

Ancbyrba qrperrq gung gurer fubhyq or n shyy vairfgvtngvba vagb Fabjonyy'f
npgvivgvrf. Jvgu uvf qbtf va nggraqnapr ur frg bhg naq znqr n pnershy gbhe
bs vafcrpgvba bs gur snez ohvyqvatf, gur bgure navznyf sbyybjvat ng n
erfcrpgshy qvfgnapr. Ng rirel srj fgrcf Ancbyrba fgbccrq naq fahssrq gur
tebhaq sbe genprf bs Fabjonyy'f sbbgfgrcf, juvpu, ur fnvq, ur pbhyq qrgrpg
ol gur fzryy. Ur fahssrq va rirel pbeare, va gur onea, va gur pbj-furq,
va gur uraubhfrf, va gur irtrgnoyr tneqra, naq sbhaq genprf bs Fabjonyy
nyzbfg rireljurer. Ur jbhyq chg uvf fabhg gb gur tebhaq, tvir frireny qrrc
favssf, nq rkpynvz va n greevoyr ibvpr, "Fabjonyy! Ur unf orra urer! V pna
fzryy uvz qvfgvapgyl!" naq ng gur jbeq "Fabjonyy" nyy gur qbtf yrg bhg
oybbq-pheqyvat tebjyf naq fubjrq gurve fvqr grrgu.

Gur navznyf jrer gubebhtuyl sevtugrarq. Vg frrzrq gb gurz nf gubhtu
Fabjonyy jrer fbzr xvaq bs vaivfvoyr vasyhrapr, creinqvat gur nve nobhg
gurz naq zranpvat gurz jvgu nyy xvaqf bs qnatref. Va gur riravat Fdhrnyre
pnyyrq gurz gbtrgure, naq jvgu na nynezrq rkcerffvba ba uvf snpr gbyq
gurz gung ur unq fbzr frevbhf arjf gb ercbeg.

"Pbzenqrf!" pevrq Fdhrnyre, znxvat yvggyr areibhf fxvcf, "n zbfg greevoyr
guvat unf orra qvfpbirerq. Fabjonyy unf fbyq uvzfrys gb Serqrevpx bs
Cvapusvryq Snez, jub vf rira abj cybggvat gb nggnpx hf naq gnxr bhe snez
njnl sebz hf! Fabjonyy vf gb npg nf uvf thvqr jura gur nggnpx ortvaf. Ohg
gurer vf jbefr guna gung. Jr unq gubhtug gung Fabjonyy'f eroryyvba jnf
pnhfrq fvzcyl ol uvf inavgl naq nzovgvba. Ohg jr jrer jebat, pbzenqrf. Qb
lbh xabj jung gur erny ernfba jnf? Fabjonyy jnf va yrnthr jvgu Wbarf sebz
gur irel fgneg! Ur jnf Wbarf'f frperg ntrag nyy gur gvzr. Vg unf nyy orra
cebirq ol qbphzragf juvpu ur yrsg oruvaq uvz naq juvpu jr unir bayl whfg
qvfpbirerq. Gb zl zvaq guvf rkcynvaf n terng qrny, pbzenqrf. Qvq jr abg
frr sbe bhefryirf ubj ur nggrzcgrq--sbeghangryl jvgubhg fhpprff--gb trg hf
qrsrngrq naq qrfgeblrq ng gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq?"

Gur navznyf jrer fghcrsvrq. Guvf jnf n jvpxrqarff sne bhgqbvat Fabjonyy'f
qrfgehpgvba bs gur jvaqzvyy. Ohg vg jnf fbzr zvahgrf orsber gurl pbhyq
shyyl gnxr vg va. Gurl nyy erzrzorerq, be gubhtug gurl erzrzorerq, ubj
gurl unq frra Fabjonyy punetvat nurnq bs gurz ng gur Onggyr bs gur
Pbjfurq, ubj ur unq enyyvrq naq rapbhentrq gurz ng rirel ghea, naq ubj ur
unq abg cnhfrq sbe na vafgnag rira jura gur cryyrgf sebz Wbarf'f tha unq
jbhaqrq uvf onpx. Ng svefg vg jnf n yvggyr qvssvphyg gb frr ubj guvf
svggrq va jvgu uvf orvat ba Wbarf'f fvqr. Rira Obkre, jub fryqbz nfxrq
dhrfgvbaf, jnf chmmyrq. Ur ynl qbja, ghpxrq uvf sber ubbsf orarngu uvz,
fuhg uvf rlrf, naq jvgu n uneq rssbeg znantrq gb sbezhyngr uvf gubhtugf.

"V qb abg oryvrir gung," ur fnvq. "Fabjonyy sbhtug oeniryl ng gur Onggyr
bs gur Pbjfurq. V fnj uvz zlfrys. Qvq jr abg tvir uvz 'Navzny Ureb, svefg
Pynff,' vzzrqvngryl nsgrejneqf?"

"Gung jnf bhe zvfgnxr, pbzenqr. Sbe jr xabj abj--vg vf nyy jevggra qbja va
gur frperg qbphzragf gung jr unir sbhaq--gung va ernyvgl ur jnf gelvat gb
yher hf gb bhe qbbz."

"Ohg ur jnf jbhaqrq," fnvq Obkre. "Jr nyy fnj uvz ehaavat jvgu oybbq."

"Gung jnf cneg bs gur neenatrzrag!" pevrq Fdhrnyre. "Wbarf'f fubg bayl
tenmrq uvz. V pbhyq fubj lbh guvf va uvf bja jevgvat, vs lbh jrer noyr gb
ernq vg. Gur cybg jnf sbe Fabjonyy, ng gur pevgvpny zbzrag, gb tvir gur
fvtany sbe syvtug naq yrnir gur svryq gb gur rarzl. Naq ur irel arneyl
fhpprrqrq--V jvyy rira fnl, pbzenqrf, ur JBHYQ unir fhpprrqrq vs vg unq
abg orra sbe bhe urebvp Yrnqre, Pbzenqr Ancbyrba. Qb lbh abg erzrzore ubj,
whfg ng gur zbzrag jura Wbarf naq uvf zra unq tbg vafvqr gur lneq,
Fabjonyy fhqqrayl ghearq naq syrq, naq znal navznyf sbyybjrq uvz? Naq qb
lbh abg erzrzore, gbb, gung vg jnf whfg ng gung zbzrag, jura cnavp jnf
fcernqvat naq nyy frrzrq ybfg, gung Pbzenqr Ancbyrba fcenat sbejneq jvgu n
pel bs 'Qrngu gb Uhznavgl!' naq fnax uvf grrgu va Wbarf'f yrt? Fheryl lbh
erzrzore GUNG, pbzenqrf?" rkpynvzrq Fdhrnyre, sevfxvat sebz fvqr gb fvqr.

Abj jura Fdhrnyre qrfpevorq gur fprar fb tencuvpnyyl, vg frrzrq gb gur
navznyf gung gurl qvq erzrzore vg. Ng nal engr, gurl erzrzorerq gung ng
gur pevgvpny zbzrag bs gur onggyr Fabjonyy unq ghearq gb syrr. Ohg Obkre
jnf fgvyy n yvggyr harnfl.

"V qb abg oryvrir gung Fabjonyy jnf n genvgbe ng gur ortvaavat," ur fnvq
svanyyl. "Jung ur unf qbar fvapr vf qvssrerag. Ohg V oryvrir gung ng gur
Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq ur jnf n tbbq pbzenqr."

"Bhe Yrnqre, Pbzenqr Ancbyrba," naabhaprq Fdhrnyre, fcrnxvat irel fybjyl
naq svezyl, "unf fgngrq pngrtbevpnyyl--pngrtbevpnyyl, pbzenqr--gung
Fabjonyy jnf Wbarf'f ntrag sebz gur irel ortvaavat--lrf, naq sebz ybat
orsber gur Eroryyvba jnf rire gubhtug bs."

"Nu, gung vf qvssrerag!" fnvq Obkre. "Vs Pbzenqr Ancbyrba fnlf vg, vg zhfg
or evtug."

"Gung vf gur gehr fcvevg, pbzenqr!" pevrq Fdhrnyre, ohg vg jnf abgvprq ur
pnfg n irel htyl ybbx ng Obkre jvgu uvf yvggyr gjvaxyvat rlrf. Ur ghearq
gb tb, gura cnhfrq naq nqqrq vzcerffviryl: "V jnea rirel navzny ba guvf
snez gb xrrc uvf rlrf irel jvqr bcra. Sbe jr unir ernfba gb guvax gung
fbzr bs Fabjonyy'f frperg ntragf ner yhexvat nzbat hf ng guvf zbzrag!"

Sbhe qnlf yngre, va gur yngr nsgreabba, Ancbyrba beqrerq nyy gur navznyf
gb nffrzoyr va gur lneq. Jura gurl jrer nyy tngurerq gbtrgure, Ancbyrba
rzretrq sebz gur snezubhfr, jrnevat obgu uvf zrqnyf (sbe ur unq erpragyl
njneqrq uvzfrys "Navzny Ureb, Svefg Pynff", naq "Navzny Ureb, Frpbaq
Pynff"), jvgu uvf avar uhtr qbtf sevfxvat ebhaq uvz naq hggrevat tebjyf
gung frag fuviref qbja nyy gur navznyf' fcvarf. Gurl nyy pbjrerq fvyragyl
va gurve cynprf, frrzvat gb xabj va nqinapr gung fbzr greevoyr guvat jnf
nobhg gb unccra.

Ancbyrba fgbbq fgreayl fheirlvat uvf nhqvrapr; gura ur hggrerq n
uvtu-cvgpurq juvzcre. Vzzrqvngryl gur qbtf obhaqrq sbejneq, frvmrq sbhe bs
gur cvtf ol gur rne naq qenttrq gurz, fdhrnyvat jvgu cnva naq greebe, gb
Ancbyrba'f srrg. Gur cvtf' rnef jrer oyrrqvat, gur qbtf unq gnfgrq oybbq,
naq sbe n srj zbzragf gurl nccrnerq gb tb dhvgr znq. Gb gur nznmrzrag bs
rirelobql, guerr bs gurz syhat gurzfryirf hcba Obkre. Obkre fnj gurz
pbzvat naq chg bhg uvf terng ubbs, pnhtug n qbt va zvq-nve, naq cvaarq
uvz gb gur tebhaq. Gur qbt fuevrxrq sbe zrepl naq gur bgure gjb syrq jvgu
gurve gnvyf orgjrra gurve yrtf. Obkre ybbxrq ng Ancbyrba gb xabj jurgure
ur fubhyq pehfu gur qbt gb qrngu be yrg vg tb. Ancbyrba nccrnerq gb punatr
pbhagranapr, naq funecyl beqrerq Obkre gb yrg gur qbt tb, jurerng Obkre
yvsgrq uvf ubbs, naq gur qbt fyhax njnl, oehvfrq naq ubjyvat.

Cerfragyl gur ghzhyg qvrq qbja. Gur sbhe cvtf jnvgrq, gerzoyvat, jvgu
thvyg jevggra ba rirel yvar bs gurve pbhagranaprf. Ancbyrba abj pnyyrq
hcba gurz gb pbasrff gurve pevzrf. Gurl jrer gur fnzr sbhe cvtf nf unq
cebgrfgrq jura Ancbyrba nobyvfurq gur Fhaqnl Zrrgvatf. Jvgubhg nal shegure
cebzcgvat gurl pbasrffrq gung gurl unq orra frpergyl va gbhpu jvgu
Fabjonyy rire fvapr uvf rkchyfvba, gung gurl unq pbyynobengrq jvgu uvz va
qrfgeblvat gur jvaqzvyy, naq gung gurl unq ragrerq vagb na nterrzrag jvgu
uvz gb unaq bire Navzny Snez gb Ze. Serqrevpx. Gurl nqqrq gung Fabjonyy
unq cevingryl nqzvggrq gb gurz gung ur unq orra Wbarf'f frperg ntrag sbe
lrnef cnfg. Jura gurl unq svavfurq gurve pbasrffvba, gur qbtf cebzcgyl
gber gurve guebngf bhg, naq va n greevoyr ibvpr Ancbyrba qrznaqrq jurgure
nal bgure navzny unq nalguvat gb pbasrff.

Gur guerr uraf jub unq orra gur evatyrnqref va gur nggrzcgrq eroryyvba
bire gur rttf abj pnzr sbejneq naq fgngrq gung Fabjonyy unq nccrnerq gb
gurz va n qernz naq vapvgrq gurz gb qvfborl Ancbyrba'f beqref. Gurl, gbb,
jrer fynhtugrerq. Gura n tbbfr pnzr sbejneq naq pbasrffrq gb univat
frpergrq fvk rnef bs pbea qhevat gur ynfg lrne'f uneirfg naq rngra gurz va
gur avtug. Gura n furrc pbasrffrq gb univat hevangrq va gur qevaxvat
cbby--hetrq gb qb guvf, fb fur fnvq, ol Fabjonyy--naq gjb bgure furrc
pbasrffrq gb univat zheqrerq na byq enz, na rfcrpvnyyl qribgrq sbyybjre bs
Ancbyrba, ol punfvat uvz ebhaq naq ebhaq n obasver jura ur jnf fhssrevat
sebz n pbhtu. Gurl jrer nyy fynva ba gur fcbg. Naq fb gur gnyr bs
pbasrffvbaf naq rkrphgvbaf jrag ba, hagvy gurer jnf n cvyr bs pbecfrf
ylvat orsber Ancbyrba'f srrg naq gur nve jnf urnil jvgu gur fzryy bs
oybbq, juvpu unq orra haxabja gurer fvapr gur rkchyfvba bs Wbarf.

Jura vg jnf nyy bire, gur erznvavat navznyf, rkprcg sbe gur cvtf naq qbtf,
percg njnl va n obql. Gurl jrer funxra naq zvfrenoyr. Gurl qvq abg xabj
juvpu jnf zber fubpxvat--gur gernpurel bs gur navznyf jub unq yrnthrq
gurzfryirf jvgu Fabjonyy, be gur pehry ergevohgvba gurl unq whfg
jvgarffrq. Va gur byq qnlf gurer unq bsgra orra fprarf bs oybbqfurq
rdhnyyl greevoyr, ohg vg frrzrq gb nyy bs gurz gung vg jnf sne jbefr abj
gung vg jnf unccravat nzbat gurzfryirf. Fvapr Wbarf unq yrsg gur snez,
hagvy gbqnl, ab navzny unq xvyyrq nabgure navzny. Abg rira n eng unq orra
xvyyrq. Gurl unq znqr gurve jnl ba gb gur yvggyr xabyy jurer gur
unys-svavfurq jvaqzvyy fgbbq, naq jvgu bar nppbeq gurl nyy ynl qbja nf
gubhtu uhqqyvat gbtrgure sbe jnezgu--Pybire, Zhevry, Orawnzva, gur pbjf,
gur furrc, naq n jubyr sybpx bs trrfr naq uraf--rirelbar, vaqrrq, rkprcg
gur png, jub unq fhqqrayl qvfnccrnerq whfg orsber Ancbyrba beqrerq gur
navznyf gb nffrzoyr. Sbe fbzr gvzr abobql fcbxr. Bayl Obkre erznvarq ba
uvf srrg. Ur svqtrgrq gb naq seb, fjvfuvat uvf ybat oynpx gnvy ntnvafg uvf
fvqrf naq bppnfvbanyyl hggrevat n yvggyr juvaal bs fhecevfr. Svanyyl ur
fnvq:

"V qb abg haqrefgnaq vg. V jbhyq abg unir oryvrirq gung fhpu guvatf pbhyq
unccra ba bhe snez. Vg zhfg or qhr gb fbzr snhyg va bhefryirf. Gur
fbyhgvba, nf V frr vg, vf gb jbex uneqre. Sebz abj bajneqf V funyy trg hc
n shyy ubhe rneyvre va gur zbeavatf."

Naq ur zbirq bss ng uvf yhzorevat gebg naq znqr sbe gur dhneel. Univat tbg
gurer, ur pbyyrpgrq gjb fhpprffvir ybnqf bs fgbar naq qenttrq gurz qbja gb
gur jvaqzvyy orsber ergvevat sbe gur avtug.

Gur navznyf uhqqyrq nobhg Pybire, abg fcrnxvat. Gur xabyy jurer gurl jrer
ylvat tnir gurz n jvqr cebfcrpg npebff gur pbhagelfvqr. Zbfg bs Navzny
Snez jnf jvguva gurve ivrj--gur ybat cnfgher fgergpuvat qbja gb gur znva
ebnq, gur unlsvryq, gur fcvaarl, gur qevaxvat cbby, gur cybhturq svryqf
jurer gur lbhat jurng jnf guvpx naq terra, naq gur erq ebbsf bs gur snez
ohvyqvatf jvgu gur fzbxr pheyvat sebz gur puvzarlf. Vg jnf n pyrne fcevat
riravat. Gur tenff naq gur ohefgvat urqtrf jrer tvyqrq ol gur yriry enlf
bs gur fha. Arire unq gur snez--naq jvgu n xvaq bs fhecevfr gurl
erzrzorerq gung vg jnf gurve bja snez, rirel vapu bs vg gurve bja
cebcregl--nccrnerq gb gur navznyf fb qrfvenoyr n cynpr. Nf Pybire ybbxrq
qbja gur uvyyfvqr ure rlrf svyyrq jvgu grnef. Vs fur pbhyq unir fcbxra ure
gubhtugf, vg jbhyq unir orra gb fnl gung guvf jnf abg jung gurl unq nvzrq
ng jura gurl unq frg gurzfryirf lrnef ntb gb jbex sbe gur bireguebj bs gur
uhzna enpr. Gurfr fprarf bs greebe naq fynhtugre jrer abg jung gurl unq
ybbxrq sbejneq gb ba gung avtug jura byq Znwbe svefg fgveerq gurz gb
eroryyvba. Vs fur urefrys unq unq nal cvpgher bs gur shgher, vg unq orra
bs n fbpvrgl bs navznyf frg serr sebz uhatre naq gur juvc, nyy rdhny, rnpu
jbexvat nppbeqvat gb uvf pncnpvgl, gur fgebat cebgrpgvat gur jrnx, nf fur
unq cebgrpgrq gur ybfg oebbq bs qhpxyvatf jvgu ure sberyrt ba gur avtug bs
Znwbe'f fcrrpu. Vafgrnq--fur qvq abg xabj jul--gurl unq pbzr gb n gvzr
jura ab bar qnerq fcrnx uvf zvaq, jura svrepr, tebjyvat qbtf ebnzrq
rireljurer, naq jura lbh unq gb jngpu lbhe pbzenqrf gbea gb cvrprf nsgre
pbasrffvat gb fubpxvat pevzrf. Gurer jnf ab gubhtug bs eroryyvba be
qvfborqvrapr va ure zvaq. Fur xarj gung, rira nf guvatf jrer, gurl jrer
sne orggre bss guna gurl unq orra va gur qnlf bs Wbarf, naq gung orsber
nyy ryfr vg jnf arrqshy gb cerirag gur erghea bs gur uhzna orvatf.
Jungrire unccrarq fur jbhyq erznva snvgushy, jbex uneq, pneel bhg gur
beqref gung jrer tvira gb ure, naq npprcg gur yrnqrefuvc bs Ancbyrba. Ohg
fgvyy, vg jnf abg sbe guvf gung fur naq nyy gur bgure navznyf unq ubcrq
naq gbvyrq. Vg jnf abg sbe guvf gung gurl unq ohvyg gur jvaqzvyy naq snprq
gur ohyyrgf bs Wbarf'f tha. Fhpu jrer ure gubhtugf, gubhtu fur ynpxrq gur
jbeqf gb rkcerff gurz.

Ng ynfg, srryvat guvf gb or va fbzr jnl n fhofgvghgr sbe gur jbeqf fur jnf
hanoyr gb svaq, fur ortna gb fvat 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq'. Gur bgure navznyf
fvggvat ebhaq ure gbbx vg hc, naq gurl fnat vg guerr gvzrf bire--irel
gharshyyl, ohg fybjyl naq zbheashyyl, va n jnl gurl unq arire fhat vg
orsber.

Gurl unq whfg svavfurq fvatvat vg sbe gur guveq gvzr jura Fdhrnyre,
nggraqrq ol gjb qbtf, nccebnpurq gurz jvgu gur nve bs univat fbzrguvat
vzcbegnag gb fnl. Ur naabhaprq gung, ol n fcrpvny qrperr bs Pbzenqr
Ancbyrba, 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' unq orra nobyvfurq. Sebz abj bajneqf vg jnf
sbeovqqra gb fvat vg.

Gur navznyf jrer gnxra nonpx.

"Jul?" pevrq Zhevry.

"Vg'f ab ybatre arrqrq, pbzenqr," fnvq Fdhrnyre fgvssyl. "'Ornfgf bs
Ratynaq' jnf gur fbat bs gur Eroryyvba. Ohg gur Eroryyvba vf abj
pbzcyrgrq. Gur rkrphgvba bs gur genvgbef guvf nsgreabba jnf gur svany npg.
Gur rarzl obgu rkgreany naq vagreany unf orra qrsrngrq. Va 'Ornfgf bs
Ratynaq' jr rkcerffrq bhe ybatvat sbe n orggre fbpvrgl va qnlf gb pbzr.
Ohg gung fbpvrgl unf abj orra rfgnoyvfurq. Pyrneyl guvf fbat unf ab ybatre
nal checbfr."

Sevtugrarq gubhtu gurl jrer, fbzr bs gur navznyf zvtug cbffvoyl unir
cebgrfgrq, ohg ng guvf zbzrag gur furrc frg hc gurve hfhny oyrngvat bs
"Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf onq," juvpu jrag ba sbe frireny zvahgrf naq chg
na raq gb gur qvfphffvba.

Fb 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' jnf urneq ab zber. Va vgf cynpr Zvavzhf, gur cbrg,
unq pbzcbfrq nabgure fbat juvpu ortna:


Navzny Snez, Navzny Snez,
Arire guebhtu zr funyg gubh pbzr gb unez!


naq guvf jnf fhat rirel Fhaqnl zbeavat nsgre gur ubvfgvat bs gur synt.
Ohg fbzrubj arvgure gur jbeqf abe gur ghar rire frrzrq gb gur navznyf gb
pbzr hc gb 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq'.




Puncgre IVVV



N srj qnlf yngre, jura gur greebe pnhfrq ol gur rkrphgvbaf unq qvrq qbja,
fbzr bs gur navznyf erzrzorerq--be gubhtug gurl erzrzorerq--gung gur Fvkgu
Pbzznaqzrag qrperrq "Ab navzny funyy xvyy nal bgure navzny." Naq gubhtu ab
bar pnerq gb zragvba vg va gur urnevat bs gur cvtf be gur qbtf, vg jnf
sryg gung gur xvyyvatf juvpu unq gnxra cynpr qvq abg fdhner jvgu guvf.
Pybire nfxrq Orawnzva gb ernq ure gur Fvkgu Pbzznaqzrag, naq jura
Orawnzva, nf hfhny, fnvq gung ur ershfrq gb zrqqyr va fhpu znggref, fur
srgpurq Zhevry. Zhevry ernq gur Pbzznaqzrag sbe ure. Vg ena: "Ab navzny
funyy xvyy nal bgure navzny JVGUBHG PNHFR." Fbzrubj be bgure, gur ynfg gjb
jbeqf unq fyvccrq bhg bs gur navznyf' zrzbel. Ohg gurl fnj abj gung gur
Pbzznaqzrag unq abg orra ivbyngrq; sbe pyrneyl gurer jnf tbbq ernfba sbe
xvyyvat gur genvgbef jub unq yrnthrq gurzfryirf jvgu Fabjonyy.

Guebhtubhg gur lrne gur navznyf jbexrq rira uneqre guna gurl unq jbexrq va
gur cerivbhf lrne. Gb erohvyq gur jvaqzvyy, jvgu jnyyf gjvpr nf guvpx nf
orsber, naq gb svavfu vg ol gur nccbvagrq qngr, gbtrgure jvgu gur erthyne
jbex bs gur snez, jnf n gerzraqbhf ynobhe. Gurer jrer gvzrf jura vg frrzrq
gb gur navznyf gung gurl jbexrq ybatre ubhef naq srq ab orggre guna gurl
unq qbar va Wbarf'f qnl. Ba Fhaqnl zbeavatf Fdhrnyre, ubyqvat qbja n ybat
fgevc bs cncre jvgu uvf gebggre, jbhyq ernq bhg gb gurz yvfgf bs svtherf
cebivat gung gur cebqhpgvba bs rirel pynff bs sbbqfghss unq vapernfrq ol
gjb uhaqerq cre prag, guerr uhaqerq cre prag, be svir uhaqerq cre prag,
nf gur pnfr zvtug or. Gur navznyf fnj ab ernfba gb qvforyvrir uvz,
rfcrpvnyyl nf gurl pbhyq ab ybatre erzrzore irel pyrneyl jung pbaqvgvbaf
unq orra yvxr orsber gur Eroryyvba. Nyy gur fnzr, gurer jrer qnlf jura
gurl sryg gung gurl jbhyq fbbare unir unq yrff svtherf naq zber sbbq.

Nyy beqref jrer abj vffhrq guebhtu Fdhrnyre be bar bs gur bgure cvtf.
Ancbyrba uvzfrys jnf abg frra va choyvp nf bsgra nf bapr va n sbegavtug.
Jura ur qvq nccrne, ur jnf nggraqrq abg bayl ol uvf ergvahr bs qbtf ohg ol
n oynpx pbpxrery jub znepurq va sebag bs uvz naq npgrq nf n xvaq bs
gehzcrgre, yrggvat bhg n ybhq "pbpx-n-qbbqyr-qbb" orsber Ancbyrba fcbxr.
Rira va gur snezubhfr, vg jnf fnvq, Ancbyrba vaunovgrq frcnengr ncnegzragf
sebz gur bguref. Ur gbbx uvf zrnyf nybar, jvgu gjb qbtf gb jnvg hcba uvz,
naq nyjnlf ngr sebz gur Pebja Qreol qvaare freivpr juvpu unq orra va gur
tynff phcobneq va gur qenjvat-ebbz. Vg jnf nyfb naabhaprq gung gur tha
jbhyq or sverq rirel lrne ba Ancbyrba'f oveguqnl, nf jryy nf ba gur bgure
gjb naavirefnevrf.

Ancbyrba jnf abj arire fcbxra bs fvzcyl nf "Ancbyrba." Ur jnf nyjnlf
ersreerq gb va sbezny fglyr nf "bhe Yrnqre, Pbzenqr Ancbyrba," naq guvf
cvtf yvxrq gb vairag sbe uvz fhpu gvgyrf nf Sngure bs Nyy Navznyf, Greebe
bs Znaxvaq, Cebgrpgbe bs gur Furrc-sbyq, Qhpxyvatf' Sevraq, naq gur yvxr.
Va uvf fcrrpurf, Fdhrnyre jbhyq gnyx jvgu gur grnef ebyyvat qbja uvf
purrxf bs Ancbyrba'f jvfqbz gur tbbqarff bs uvf urneg, naq gur qrrc ybir
ur ober gb nyy navznyf rireljurer, rira naq rfcrpvnyyl gur haunccl navznyf
jub fgvyy yvirq va vtabenapr naq fynirel ba bgure snezf. Vg unq orpbzr
hfhny gb tvir Ancbyrba gur perqvg sbe rirel fhpprffshy npuvrirzrag naq
rirel fgebxr bs tbbq sbeghar. Lbh jbhyq bsgra urne bar ura erznex gb
nabgure, "Haqre gur thvqnapr bs bhe Yrnqre, Pbzenqr Ancbyrba, V unir ynvq
svir rttf va fvk qnlf"; be gjb pbjf, rawblvat n qevax ng gur cbby, jbhyq
rkpynvz, "Gunaxf gb gur yrnqrefuvc bs Pbzenqr Ancbyrba, ubj rkpryyrag guvf
jngre gnfgrf!" Gur trareny srryvat ba gur snez jnf jryy rkcerffrq va n
cbrz ragvgyrq Pbzenqr Ancbyrba, juvpu jnf pbzcbfrq ol Zvavzhf naq juvpu
ena nf sbyybjf:


Sevraq bs sngureyrff!
Sbhagnva bs unccvarff!
Ybeq bs gur fjvyy-ohpxrg! Bu, ubj zl fbhy vf ba
Sver jura V tnmr ng gul
Pnyz naq pbzznaqvat rlr,
Yvxr gur fha va gur fxl,
Pbzenqr Ancbyrba!

Gubh ner gur tvire bs
Nyy gung gul perngherf ybir,
Shyy oryyl gjvpr n qnl, pyrna fgenj gb ebyy hcba;
Rirel ornfg terng be fznyy
Fyrrcf ng crnpr va uvf fgnyy,
Gubh jngpurfg bire nyy,
Pbzenqr Ancbyrba!

Unq V n fhpxvat-cvt,
Rer ur unq tebja nf ovt
Rira nf n cvag obggyr be nf n ebyyvat-cva,
Ur fubhyq unir yrnearq gb or
Snvgushy naq gehr gb gurr,
Lrf, uvf svefg fdhrnx fubhyq or
"Pbzenqr Ancbyrba!"


Ancbyrba nccebirq bs guvf cbrz naq pnhfrq vg gb or vafpevorq ba gur jnyy
bs gur ovt onea, ng gur bccbfvgr raq sebz gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf. Vg jnf
fhezbhagrq ol n cbegenvg bs Ancbyrba, va cebsvyr, rkrphgrq ol Fdhrnyre va
juvgr cnvag.

Zrnajuvyr, guebhtu gur ntrapl bs Julzcre, Ancbyrba jnf ratntrq va
pbzcyvpngrq artbgvngvbaf jvgu Serqrevpx naq Cvyxvatgba. Gur cvyr bs gvzore
jnf fgvyy hafbyq. Bs gur gjb, Serqrevpx jnf gur zber nakvbhf gb trg ubyq
bs vg, ohg ur jbhyq abg bssre n ernfbanoyr cevpr. Ng gur fnzr gvzr gurer
jrer erarjrq ehzbhef gung Serqrevpx naq uvf zra jrer cybggvat gb nggnpx
Navzny Snez naq gb qrfgebl gur jvaqzvyy, gur ohvyqvat bs juvpu unq nebhfrq
shevbhf wrnybhfl va uvz. Fabjonyy jnf xabja gb or fgvyy fxhyxvat ba
Cvapusvryq Snez. Va gur zvqqyr bs gur fhzzre gur navznyf jrer nynezrq gb
urne gung guerr uraf unq pbzr sbejneq naq pbasrffrq gung, vafcverq ol
Fabjonyy, gurl unq ragrerq vagb n cybg gb zheqre Ancbyrba. Gurl jrer
rkrphgrq vzzrqvngryl, naq serfu cerpnhgvbaf sbe Ancbyrba'f fnsrgl jrer
gnxra. Sbhe qbtf thneqrq uvf orq ng avtug, bar ng rnpu pbeare, naq n lbhat
cvt anzrq Cvaxrlr jnf tvira gur gnfx bs gnfgvat nyy uvf sbbq orsber ur ngr
vg, yrfg vg fubhyq or cbvfbarq.

Ng nobhg gur fnzr gvzr vg jnf tvira bhg gung Ancbyrba unq neenatrq gb fryy
gur cvyr bs gvzore gb Ze. Cvyxvatgba; ur jnf nyfb tbvat gb ragre vagb n
erthyne nterrzrag sbe gur rkpunatr bs pregnva cebqhpgf orgjrra Navzny Snez
naq Sbkjbbq. Gur eryngvbaf orgjrra Ancbyrba naq Cvyxvatgba, gubhtu gurl
jrer bayl pbaqhpgrq guebhtu Julzcre, jrer abj nyzbfg sevraqyl. Gur navznyf
qvfgehfgrq Cvyxvatgba, nf n uhzna orvat, ohg terngyl cersreerq uvz gb
Serqrevpx, jubz gurl obgu srnerq naq ungrq. Nf gur fhzzre jber ba, naq gur
jvaqzvyy arnerq pbzcyrgvba, gur ehzbhef bs na vzcraqvat gernpurebhf nggnpx
terj fgebatre naq fgebatre. Serqrevpx, vg jnf fnvq, vagraqrq gb oevat
ntnvafg gurz gjragl zra nyy nezrq jvgu thaf, naq ur unq nyernql oevorq gur
zntvfgengrf naq cbyvpr, fb gung vs ur pbhyq bapr trg ubyq bs gur
gvgyr-qrrqf bs Navzny Snez gurl jbhyq nfx ab dhrfgvbaf. Zberbire, greevoyr
fgbevrf jrer yrnxvat bhg sebz Cvapusvryq nobhg gur pehrygvrf gung
Serqrevpx cenpgvfrq hcba uvf navznyf. Ur unq sybttrq na byq ubefr gb
qrngu, ur fgneirq uvf pbjf, ur unq xvyyrq n qbt ol guebjvat vg vagb gur
sheanpr, ur nzhfrq uvzfrys va gur riravatf ol znxvat pbpxf svtug jvgu
fcyvagref bs enmbe-oynqr gvrq gb gurve fchef. Gur navznyf' oybbq obvyrq
jvgu entr jura gurl urneq bs gurfr guvatf orvat qbar gb gurve pbzenqrf,
naq fbzrgvzrf gurl pynzbherq gb or nyybjrq gb tb bhg va n obql naq nggnpx
Cvapusvryq Snez, qevir bhg gur uhznaf, naq frg gur navznyf serr. Ohg
Fdhrnyre pbhafryyrq gurz gb nibvq enfu npgvbaf naq gehfg va Pbzenqr
Ancbyrba'f fgengrtl.

Arireguryrff, srryvat ntnvafg Serqrevpx pbagvahrq gb eha uvtu. Bar Fhaqnl
zbeavat Ancbyrba nccrnerq va gur onea naq rkcynvarq gung ur unq arire ng
nal gvzr pbagrzcyngrq fryyvat gur cvyr bs gvzore gb Serqrevpx; ur
pbafvqrerq vg orarngu uvf qvtavgl, ur fnvq, gb unir qrnyvatf jvgu
fpbhaqeryf bs gung qrfpevcgvba. Gur cvtrbaf jub jrer fgvyy frag bhg gb
fcernq gvqvatf bs gur Eroryyvba jrer sbeovqqra gb frg sbbg naljurer ba
Sbkjbbq, naq jrer nyfb beqrerq gb qebc gurve sbezre fybtna bs "Qrngu gb
Uhznavgl" va snibhe bs "Qrngu gb Serqrevpx." Va gur yngr fhzzre lrg
nabgure bs Fabjonyy'f znpuvangvbaf jnf ynvq oner. Gur jurng pebc jnf shyy
bs jrrqf, naq vg jnf qvfpbirerq gung ba bar bs uvf abpgheany ivfvgf
Fabjonyy unq zvkrq jrrq frrqf jvgu gur frrq pbea. N tnaqre jub unq orra
cevil gb gur cybg unq pbasrffrq uvf thvyg gb Fdhrnyre naq vzzrqvngryl
pbzzvggrq fhvpvqr ol fjnyybjvat qrnqyl avtugfunqr oreevrf. Gur navznyf
abj nyfb yrnearq gung Fabjonyy unq arire--nf znal bs gurz unq oryvrirq
uvguregb--erprvirq gur beqre bs "Navzny Ureb, Svefg Pynff." Guvf jnf
zreryl n yrtraq juvpu unq orra fcernq fbzr gvzr nsgre gur Onggyr bs gur
Pbjfurq ol Fabjonyy uvzfrys. Fb sne sebz orvat qrpbengrq, ur unq orra
prafherq sbe fubjvat pbjneqvpr va gur onggyr. Bapr ntnva fbzr bs gur
navznyf urneq guvf jvgu n pregnva orjvyqrezrag, ohg Fdhrnyre jnf fbba noyr
gb pbaivapr gurz gung gurve zrzbevrf unq orra ng snhyg.

Va gur nhghza, ol n gerzraqbhf, rkunhfgvat rssbeg--sbe gur uneirfg unq gb
or tngurerq ng nyzbfg gur fnzr gvzr--gur jvaqzvyy jnf svavfurq. Gur
znpuvarel unq fgvyy gb or vafgnyyrq, naq Julzcre jnf artbgvngvat gur
chepunfr bs vg, ohg gur fgehpgher jnf pbzcyrgrq. Va gur grrgu bs rirel
qvssvphygl, va fcvgr bs varkcrevrapr, bs cevzvgvir vzcyrzragf, bs onq yhpx
naq bs Fabjonyy'f gernpurel, gur jbex unq orra svavfurq chapghnyyl gb gur
irel qnl! Gverq bhg ohg cebhq, gur navznyf jnyxrq ebhaq naq ebhaq gurve
znfgrecvrpr, juvpu nccrnerq rira zber ornhgvshy va gurve rlrf guna jura vg
unq orra ohvyg gur svefg gvzr. Zberbire, gur jnyyf jrer gjvpr nf guvpx nf
orsber. Abguvat fubeg bs rkcybfvirf jbhyq ynl gurz ybj guvf gvzr! Naq jura
gurl gubhtug bs ubj gurl unq ynobherq, jung qvfpbhentrzragf gurl unq
birepbzr, naq gur rabezbhf qvssrerapr gung jbhyq or znqr va gurve yvirf
jura gur fnvyf jrer gheavat naq gur qlanzbf ehaavat--jura gurl gubhtug bs
nyy guvf, gurve gverqarff sbefbbx gurz naq gurl tnzobyyrq ebhaq naq ebhaq
gur jvaqzvyy, hggrevat pevrf bs gevhzcu. Ancbyrba uvzfrys, nggraqrq ol uvf
qbtf naq uvf pbpxrery, pnzr qbja gb vafcrpg gur pbzcyrgrq jbex; ur
crefbanyyl pbatenghyngrq gur navznyf ba gurve npuvrirzrag, naq naabhaprq
gung gur zvyy jbhyq or anzrq Ancbyrba Zvyy.

Gjb qnlf yngre gur navznyf jrer pnyyrq gbtrgure sbe n fcrpvny zrrgvat va
gur onea. Gurl jrer fgehpx qhzo jvgu fhecevfr jura Ancbyrba naabhaprq gung
ur unq fbyq gur cvyr bs gvzore gb Serqrevpx. Gbzbeebj Serqrevpx'f jntbaf
jbhyq neevir naq ortva pnegvat vg njnl. Guebhtubhg gur jubyr crevbq bs uvf
frrzvat sevraqfuvc jvgu Cvyxvatgba, Ancbyrba unq ernyyl orra va frperg
nterrzrag jvgu Serqrevpx.

Nyy eryngvbaf jvgu Sbkjbbq unq orra oebxra bss; vafhygvat zrffntrf unq
orra frag gb Cvyxvatgba. Gur cvtrbaf unq orra gbyq gb nibvq Cvapusvryq
Snez naq gb nygre gurve fybtna sebz "Qrngu gb Serqrevpx" gb "Qrngu gb
Cvyxvatgba." Ng gur fnzr gvzr Ancbyrba nffherq gur navznyf gung gur
fgbevrf bs na vzcraqvat nggnpx ba Navzny Snez jrer pbzcyrgryl hagehr, naq
gung gur gnyrf nobhg Serqrevpx'f pehrygl gb uvf bja navznyf unq orra
terngyl rknttrengrq. Nyy gurfr ehzbhef unq cebonoyl bevtvangrq jvgu
Fabjonyy naq uvf ntragf. Vg abj nccrnerq gung Fabjonyy jnf abg, nsgre nyy,
uvqvat ba Cvapusvryq Snez, naq va snpg unq arire orra gurer va uvf yvsr:
ur jnf yvivat--va pbafvqrenoyr yhkhel, fb vg jnf fnvq--ng Sbkjbbq, naq unq
va ernyvgl orra n crafvbare bs Cvyxvatgba sbe lrnef cnfg.

Gur cvtf jrer va rpfgnfvrf bire Ancbyrba'f phaavat. Ol frrzvat gb or
sevraqyl jvgu Cvyxvatgba ur unq sbeprq Serqrevpx gb envfr uvf cevpr ol
gjryir cbhaqf. Ohg gur fhcrevbe dhnyvgl bs Ancbyrba'f zvaq, fnvq Fdhrnyre,
jnf fubja va gur snpg gung ur gehfgrq abobql, abg rira Serqrevpx.
Serqrevpx unq jnagrq gb cnl sbe gur gvzore jvgu fbzrguvat pnyyrq n purdhr,
juvpu, vg frrzrq, jnf n cvrpr bs cncre jvgu n cebzvfr gb cnl jevggra hcba
vg. Ohg Ancbyrba jnf gbb pyrire sbe uvz. Ur unq qrznaqrq cnlzrag va erny
svir-cbhaq abgrf, juvpu jrer gb or unaqrq bire orsber gur gvzore jnf
erzbirq. Nyernql Serqrevpx unq cnvq hc; naq gur fhz ur unq cnvq jnf whfg
rabhtu gb ohl gur znpuvarel sbe gur jvaqzvyy.

Zrnajuvyr gur gvzore jnf orvat pnegrq njnl ng uvtu fcrrq. Jura vg jnf nyy
tbar, nabgure fcrpvny zrrgvat jnf uryq va gur onea sbe gur navznyf gb
vafcrpg Serqrevpx'f onax-abgrf. Fzvyvat orngvsvpnyyl, naq jrnevat obgu uvf
qrpbengvbaf, Ancbyrba ercbfrq ba n orq bs fgenj ba gur cyngsbez, jvgu gur
zbarl ng uvf fvqr, arngyl cvyrq ba n puvan qvfu sebz gur snezubhfr
xvgpura. Gur navznyf svyrq fybjyl cnfg, naq rnpu tnmrq uvf svyy. Naq Obkre
chg bhg uvf abfr gb favss ng gur onax-abgrf, naq gur syvzfl juvgr guvatf
fgveerq naq ehfgyrq va uvf oerngu.

Guerr qnlf yngre gurer jnf n greevoyr uhyynonybb. Julzcre, uvf snpr qrnqyl
cnyr, pnzr enpvat hc gur cngu ba uvf ovplpyr, syhat vg qbja va gur lneq
naq ehfurq fgenvtug vagb gur snezubhfr. Gur arkg zbzrag n pubxvat ebne bs
entr fbhaqrq sebz Ancbyrba'f ncnegzragf. Gur arjf bs jung unq unccrarq
fcrq ebhaq gur snez yvxr jvyqsver. Gur onaxabgrf jrer sbetrevrf! Serqrevpx
unq tbg gur gvzore sbe abguvat!

Ancbyrba pnyyrq gur navznyf gbtrgure vzzrqvngryl naq va n greevoyr ibvpr
cebabhaprq gur qrngu fragrapr hcba Serqrevpx. Jura pncgherq, ur fnvq,
Serqrevpx fubhyq or obvyrq nyvir. Ng gur fnzr gvzr ur jnearq gurz gung
nsgre guvf gernpurebhf qrrq gur jbefg jnf gb or rkcrpgrq. Serqrevpx naq
uvf zra zvtug znxr gurve ybat-rkcrpgrq nggnpx ng nal zbzrag. Fragvaryf
jrer cynprq ng nyy gur nccebnpurf gb gur snez. Va nqqvgvba, sbhe cvtrbaf
jrer frag gb Sbkjbbq jvgu n pbapvyvngbel zrffntr, juvpu vg jnf ubcrq zvtug
er-rfgnoyvfu tbbq eryngvbaf jvgu Cvyxvatgba.

Gur irel arkg zbeavat gur nggnpx pnzr. Gur navznyf jrer ng oernxsnfg jura
gur ybbx-bhgf pnzr enpvat va jvgu gur arjf gung Serqrevpx naq uvf
sbyybjref unq nyernql pbzr guebhtu gur svir-oneerq tngr. Obyqyl rabhtu gur
navznyf fnyyvrq sbegu gb zrrg gurz, ohg guvf gvzr gurl qvq abg unir gur
rnfl ivpgbel gung gurl unq unq va gur Onggyr bs gur Pbjfurq. Gurer jrer
svsgrra zra, jvgu unys n qbmra thaf orgjrra gurz, naq gurl bcrarq sver nf
fbba nf gurl tbg jvguva svsgl lneqf. Gur navznyf pbhyq abg snpr gur
greevoyr rkcybfvbaf naq gur fgvatvat cryyrgf, naq va fcvgr bs gur rssbegf
bs Ancbyrba naq Obkre gb enyyl gurz, gurl jrer fbba qevira onpx. N ahzore
bs gurz jrer nyernql jbhaqrq. Gurl gbbx ershtr va gur snez ohvyqvatf naq
crrcrq pnhgvbhfyl bhg sebz puvaxf naq xabg-ubyrf. Gur jubyr bs gur ovt
cnfgher, vapyhqvat gur jvaqzvyy, jnf va gur unaqf bs gur rarzl. Sbe gur
zbzrag rira Ancbyrba frrzrq ng n ybff. Ur cnprq hc naq qbja jvgubhg n
jbeq, uvf gnvy evtvq naq gjvgpuvat. Jvfgshy tynaprf jrer frag va gur
qverpgvba bs Sbkjbbq. Vs Cvyxvatgba naq uvf zra jbhyq uryc gurz, gur qnl
zvtug lrg or jba. Ohg ng guvf zbzrag gur sbhe cvtrbaf, jub unq orra frag
bhg ba gur qnl orsber, erghearq, bar bs gurz ornevat n fpenc bs cncre sebz
Cvyxvatgba. Ba vg jnf crapvyyrq gur jbeqf: "Freirf lbh evtug."

Zrnajuvyr Serqrevpx naq uvf zra unq unygrq nobhg gur jvaqzvyy. Gur navznyf
jngpurq gurz, naq n zhezhe bs qvfznl jrag ebhaq. Gjb bs gur zra unq
cebqhprq n pebjone naq n fyrqtr unzzre. Gurl jrer tbvat gb xabpx gur
jvaqzvyy qbja.

"Vzcbffvoyr!" pevrq Ancbyrba. "Jr unir ohvyg gur jnyyf sne gbb guvpx sbe
gung. Gurl pbhyq abg xabpx vg qbja va n jrrx. Pbhentr, pbzenqrf!"

Ohg Orawnzva jnf jngpuvat gur zbirzragf bs gur zra vagragyl. Gur gjb jvgu
gur unzzre naq gur pebjone jrer qevyyvat n ubyr arne gur onfr bs gur
jvaqzvyy. Fybjyl, naq jvgu na nve nyzbfg bs nzhfrzrag, Orawnzva abqqrq uvf
ybat zhmmyr.

"V gubhtug fb," ur fnvq. "Qb lbh abg frr jung gurl ner qbvat? Va nabgure
zbzrag gurl ner tbvat gb cnpx oynfgvat cbjqre vagb gung ubyr."

Greevsvrq, gur navznyf jnvgrq. Vg jnf vzcbffvoyr abj gb iragher bhg bs gur
furygre bs gur ohvyqvatf. Nsgre n srj zvahgrf gur zra jrer frra gb or
ehaavat va nyy qverpgvbaf. Gura gurer jnf n qrnsravat ebne. Gur cvtrbaf
fjveyrq vagb gur nve, naq nyy gur navznyf, rkprcg Ancbyrba, syhat
gurzfryirf syng ba gurve oryyvrf naq uvq gurve snprf. Jura gurl tbg hc
ntnva, n uhtr pybhq bs oynpx fzbxr jnf unatvat jurer gur jvaqzvyy unq
orra. Fybjyl gur oerrmr qevsgrq vg njnl. Gur jvaqzvyy unq prnfrq gb rkvfg!

Ng guvf fvtug gur navznyf' pbhentr erghearq gb gurz. Gur srne naq qrfcnve
gurl unq sryg n zbzrag rneyvre jrer qebjarq va gurve entr ntnvafg guvf
ivyr, pbagrzcgvoyr npg. N zvtugl pel sbe iratrnapr jrag hc, naq jvgubhg
jnvgvat sbe shegure beqref gurl punetrq sbegu va n obql naq znqr fgenvtug
sbe gur rarzl. Guvf gvzr gurl qvq abg urrq gur pehry cryyrgf gung fjrcg
bire gurz yvxr unvy. Vg jnf n fnintr, ovggre onggyr. Gur zra sverq ntnva
naq ntnva, naq, jura gur navznyf tbg gb pybfr dhnegref, ynfurq bhg jvgu
gurve fgvpxf naq gurve urnil obbgf. N pbj, guerr furrc, naq gjb trrfr jrer
xvyyrq, naq arneyl rirelbar jnf jbhaqrq. Rira Ancbyrba, jub jnf qverpgvat
bcrengvbaf sebz gur erne, unq gur gvc bs uvf gnvy puvccrq ol n cryyrg. Ohg
gur zra qvq abg tb hafpngurq rvgure. Guerr bs gurz unq gurve urnqf oebxra
ol oybjf sebz Obkre'f ubbsf; nabgure jnf tberq va gur oryyl ol n pbj'f
ubea; nabgure unq uvf gebhfref arneyl gbea bss ol Wrffvr naq Oyhroryy. Naq
jura gur avar qbtf bs Ancbyrba'f bja obqlthneq, jubz ur unq vafgehpgrq gb
znxr n qrgbhe haqre pbire bs gur urqtr, fhqqrayl nccrnerq ba gur zra'f
synax, onlvat srebpvbhfyl, cnavp biregbbx gurz. Gurl fnj gung gurl jrer va
qnatre bs orvat fheebhaqrq. Serqrevpx fubhgrq gb uvf zra gb trg bhg juvyr
gur tbvat jnf tbbq, naq gur arkg zbzrag gur pbjneqyl rarzl jnf ehaavat sbe
qrne yvsr. Gur navznyf punfrq gurz evtug qbja gb gur obggbz bs gur svryq,
naq tbg va fbzr ynfg xvpxf ng gurz nf gurl sbeprq gurve jnl guebhtu gur
gubea urqtr.

Gurl unq jba, ohg gurl jrer jrnel naq oyrrqvat. Fybjyl gurl ortna gb yvzc
onpx gbjneqf gur snez. Gur fvtug bs gurve qrnq pbzenqrf fgergpurq hcba gur
tenff zbirq fbzr bs gurz gb grnef. Naq sbe n yvggyr juvyr gurl unygrq va
fbeebjshy fvyrapr ng gur cynpr jurer gur jvaqzvyy unq bapr fgbbq. Lrf, vg
jnf tbar; nyzbfg gur ynfg genpr bs gurve ynobhe jnf tbar! Rira gur
sbhaqngvbaf jrer cnegvnyyl qrfgeblrq. Naq va erohvyqvat vg gurl pbhyq abg
guvf gvzr, nf orsber, znxr hfr bs gur snyyra fgbarf. Guvf gvzr gur fgbarf
unq inavfurq gbb. Gur sbepr bs gur rkcybfvba unq syhat gurz gb qvfgnaprf
bs uhaqerqf bs lneqf. Vg jnf nf gubhtu gur jvaqzvyy unq arire orra.

Nf gurl nccebnpurq gur snez Fdhrnyre, jub unq hanppbhagnoyl orra nofrag
qhevat gur svtugvat, pnzr fxvccvat gbjneqf gurz, juvfxvat uvf gnvy naq
ornzvat jvgu fngvfsnpgvba. Naq gur navznyf urneq, sebz gur qverpgvba bs
gur snez ohvyqvatf, gur fbyrza obbzvat bs n tha.

"Jung vf gung tha svevat sbe?" fnvq Obkre.

"Gb pryroengr bhe ivpgbel!" pevrq Fdhrnyre.

"Jung ivpgbel?" fnvq Obkre. Uvf xarrf jrer oyrrqvat, ur unq ybfg n fubr
naq fcyvg uvf ubbs, naq n qbmra cryyrgf unq ybqtrq gurzfryirf va uvf uvaq
yrt.

"Jung ivpgbel, pbzenqr? Unir jr abg qevira gur rarzl bss bhe fbvy--gur
fnperq fbvy bs Navzny Snez?"

"Ohg gurl unir qrfgeblrq gur jvaqzvyy. Naq jr unq jbexrq ba vg sbe gjb
lrnef!"

"Jung znggre? Jr jvyy ohvyq nabgure jvaqzvyy. Jr jvyy ohvyq fvk jvaqzvyyf
vs jr srry yvxr vg. Lbh qb abg nccerpvngr, pbzenqr, gur zvtugl guvat gung
jr unir qbar. Gur rarzl jnf va bpphcngvba bs guvf irel tebhaq gung jr
fgnaq hcba. Naq abj--gunaxf gb gur yrnqrefuvc bs Pbzenqr Ancbyrba--jr unir
jba rirel vapu bs vg onpx ntnva!"

"Gura jr unir jba onpx jung jr unq orsber," fnvq Obkre.

"Gung vf bhe ivpgbel," fnvq Fdhrnyre.

Gurl yvzcrq vagb gur lneq. Gur cryyrgf haqre gur fxva bs Obkre'f yrt
fznegrq cnvashyyl. Ur fnj nurnq bs uvz gur urnil ynobhe bs erohvyqvat gur
jvaqzvyy sebz gur sbhaqngvbaf, naq nyernql va vzntvangvba ur oenprq
uvzfrys sbe gur gnfx. Ohg sbe gur svefg gvzr vg bppheerq gb uvz gung ur
jnf ryrira lrnef byq naq gung creuncf uvf terng zhfpyrf jrer abg dhvgr
jung gurl unq bapr orra.

Ohg jura gur navznyf fnj gur terra synt sylvat, naq urneq gur tha svevat
ntnva--frira gvzrf vg jnf sverq va nyy--naq urneq gur fcrrpu gung Ancbyrba
znqr, pbatenghyngvat gurz ba gurve pbaqhpg, vg qvq frrz gb gurz nsgre nyy
gung gurl unq jba n terng ivpgbel. Gur navznyf fynva va gur onggyr jrer
tvira n fbyrza shareny. Obkre naq Pybire chyyrq gur jntba juvpu freirq nf
n urnefr, naq Ancbyrba uvzfrys jnyxrq ng gur urnq bs gur cebprffvba. Gjb
jubyr qnlf jrer tvira bire gb pryroengvbaf. Gurer jrer fbatf, fcrrpurf,
naq zber svevat bs gur tha, naq n fcrpvny tvsg bs na nccyr jnf orfgbjrq ba
rirel navzny, jvgu gjb bhaprf bs pbea sbe rnpu oveq naq guerr ovfphvgf sbe
rnpu qbt. Vg jnf naabhaprq gung gur onggyr jbhyq or pnyyrq gur Onggyr bs
gur Jvaqzvyy, naq gung Ancbyrba unq perngrq n arj qrpbengvba, gur Beqre
bs gur Terra Onaare, juvpu ur unq pbasreerq hcba uvzfrys. Va gur trareny
erwbvpvatf gur hasbeghangr nssnve bs gur onaxabgrf jnf sbetbggra.

Vg jnf n srj qnlf yngre guna guvf gung gur cvtf pnzr hcba n pnfr bs juvfxl
va gur pryynef bs gur snezubhfr. Vg unq orra bireybbxrq ng gur gvzr jura
gur ubhfr jnf svefg bpphcvrq. Gung avtug gurer pnzr sebz gur snezubhfr gur
fbhaq bs ybhq fvatvat, va juvpu, gb rirelbar'f fhecevfr, gur fgenvaf bs
'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq' jrer zvkrq hc. Ng nobhg unys cnfg avar Ancbyrba,
jrnevat na byq objyre ung bs Ze. Wbarf'f, jnf qvfgvapgyl frra gb rzretr
sebz gur onpx qbbe, tnyybc encvqyl ebhaq gur lneq, naq qvfnccrne vaqbbef
ntnva. Ohg va gur zbeavat n qrrc fvyrapr uhat bire gur snezubhfr. Abg n
cvt nccrnerq gb or fgveevat. Vg jnf arneyl avar b'pybpx jura Fdhrnyre znqr
uvf nccrnenapr, jnyxvat fybjyl naq qrwrpgrqyl, uvf rlrf qhyy, uvf gnvy
unatvat yvzcyl oruvaq uvz, naq jvgu rirel nccrnenapr bs orvat frevbhfyl
vyy. Ur pnyyrq gur navznyf gbtrgure naq gbyq gurz gung ur unq n greevoyr
cvrpr bs arjf gb vzcneg. Pbzenqr Ancbyrba jnf qlvat!

N pel bs ynzragngvba jrag hc. Fgenj jnf ynvq qbja bhgfvqr gur qbbef bs gur
snezubhfr, naq gur navznyf jnyxrq ba gvcgbr. Jvgu grnef va gurve rlrf gurl
nfxrq bar nabgure jung gurl fubhyq qb vs gurve Yrnqre jrer gnxra njnl sebz
gurz. N ehzbhe jrag ebhaq gung Fabjonyy unq nsgre nyy pbagevirq gb
vagebqhpr cbvfba vagb Ancbyrba'f sbbq. Ng ryrira b'pybpx Fdhrnyre pnzr
bhg gb znxr nabgure naabhaprzrag. Nf uvf ynfg npg hcba rnegu, Pbzenqr
Ancbyrba unq cebabhaprq n fbyrza qrperr: gur qevaxvat bs nypbuby jnf gb or
chavfurq ol qrngu.

Ol gur riravat, ubjrire, Ancbyrba nccrnerq gb or fbzrjung orggre, naq gur
sbyybjvat zbeavat Fdhrnyre jnf noyr gb gryy gurz gung ur jnf jryy ba gur
jnl gb erpbirel. Ol gur riravat bs gung qnl Ancbyrba jnf onpx ng jbex, naq
ba gur arkg qnl vg jnf yrnearq gung ur unq vafgehpgrq Julzcre gb chepunfr
va Jvyyvatqba fbzr obbxyrgf ba oerjvat naq qvfgvyyvat. N jrrx yngre
Ancbyrba tnir beqref gung gur fznyy cnqqbpx orlbaq gur bepuneq, juvpu vg
unq cerivbhfyl orra vagraqrq gb frg nfvqr nf n tenmvat-tebhaq sbe navznyf
jub jrer cnfg jbex, jnf gb or cybhturq hc. Vg jnf tvira bhg gung gur
cnfgher jnf rkunhfgrq naq arrqrq er-frrqvat; ohg vg fbba orpnzr xabja gung
Ancbyrba vagraqrq gb fbj vg jvgu oneyrl.

Nobhg guvf gvzr gurer bppheerq n fgenatr vapvqrag juvpu uneqyl nalbar jnf
noyr gb haqrefgnaq. Bar avtug ng nobhg gjryir b'pybpx gurer jnf n ybhq
penfu va gur lneq, naq gur navznyf ehfurq bhg bs gurve fgnyyf. Vg jnf n
zbbayvg avtug. Ng gur sbbg bs gur raq jnyy bs gur ovt onea, jurer gur
Frira Pbzznaqzragf jrer jevggra, gurer ynl n ynqqre oebxra va gjb cvrprf.
Fdhrnyre, grzcbenevyl fghaarq, jnf fcenjyvat orfvqr vg, naq arne ng unaq
gurer ynl n ynagrea, n cnvag-oehfu, naq na bireghearq cbg bs juvgr cnvag.
Gur qbtf vzzrqvngryl znqr n evat ebhaq Fdhrnyre, naq rfpbegrq uvz onpx gb
gur snezubhfr nf fbba nf ur jnf noyr gb jnyx. Abar bs gur navznyf pbhyq
sbez nal vqrn nf gb jung guvf zrnag, rkprcg byq Orawnzva, jub abqqrq uvf
zhmmyr jvgu n xabjvat nve, naq frrzrq gb haqrefgnaq, ohg jbhyq fnl abguvat.

Ohg n srj qnlf yngre Zhevry, ernqvat bire gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf gb
urefrys, abgvprq gung gurer jnf lrg nabgure bs gurz juvpu gur navznyf unq
erzrzorerq jebat. Gurl unq gubhtug gur Svsgu Pbzznaqzrag jnf "Ab navzny
funyy qevax nypbuby," ohg gurer jrer gjb jbeqf gung gurl unq sbetbggra.
Npghnyyl gur Pbzznaqzrag ernq: "Ab navzny funyy qevax nypbuby GB RKPRFF."




Puncgre VK



Obkre'f fcyvg ubbs jnf n ybat gvzr va urnyvat. Gurl unq fgnegrq gur
erohvyqvat bs gur jvaqzvyy gur qnl nsgre gur ivpgbel pryroengvbaf jrer
raqrq. Obkre ershfrq gb gnxr rira n qnl bss jbex, naq znqr vg n cbvag bs
ubabhe abg gb yrg vg or frra gung ur jnf va cnva. Va gur riravatf ur jbhyq
nqzvg cevingryl gb Pybire gung gur ubbs gebhoyrq uvz n terng qrny. Pybire
gerngrq gur ubbs jvgu cbhygvprf bs ureof juvpu fur cercnerq ol purjvat
gurz, naq obgu fur naq Orawnzva hetrq Obkre gb jbex yrff uneq. "N ubefr'f
yhatf qb abg ynfg sbe rire," fur fnvq gb uvz. Ohg Obkre jbhyq abg yvfgra.
Ur unq, ur fnvq, bayl bar erny nzovgvba yrsg--gb frr gur jvaqzvyy jryy
haqre jnl orsber ur ernpurq gur ntr sbe ergverzrag.

Ng gur ortvaavat, jura gur ynjf bs Navzny Snez jrer svefg sbezhyngrq,
gur ergvevat ntr unq orra svkrq sbe ubefrf naq cvtf ng gjryir, sbe pbjf ng
sbhegrra, sbe qbtf ng avar, sbe furrc ng frira, naq sbe uraf naq trrfr ng
svir. Yvoreny byq-ntr crafvbaf unq orra nterrq hcba. Nf lrg ab navzny unq
npghnyyl ergverq ba crafvba, ohg bs yngr gur fhowrpg unq orra qvfphffrq
zber naq zber. Abj gung gur fznyy svryq orlbaq gur bepuneq unq orra frg
nfvqr sbe oneyrl, vg jnf ehzbherq gung n pbeare bs gur ynetr cnfgher jnf
gb or sraprq bss naq ghearq vagb n tenmvat-tebhaq sbe fhcrenaahngrq
navznyf. Sbe n ubefr, vg jnf fnvq, gur crafvba jbhyq or svir cbhaqf bs
pbea n qnl naq, va jvagre, svsgrra cbhaqf bs unl, jvgu n pneebg be
cbffvoyl na nccyr ba choyvp ubyvqnlf. Obkre'f gjrysgu oveguqnl jnf qhr va
gur yngr fhzzre bs gur sbyybjvat lrne.

Zrnajuvyr yvsr jnf uneq. Gur jvagre jnf nf pbyq nf gur ynfg bar unq orra,
naq sbbq jnf rira fubegre. Bapr ntnva nyy engvbaf jrer erqhprq, rkprcg
gubfr bs gur cvtf naq gur qbtf. N gbb evtvq rdhnyvgl va engvbaf, Fdhrnyre
rkcynvarq, jbhyq unir orra pbagenel gb gur cevapvcyrf bs Navznyvfz. Va nal
pnfr ur unq ab qvssvphygl va cebivat gb gur bgure navznyf gung gurl jrer
ABG va ernyvgl fubeg bs sbbq, jungrire gur nccrnenaprf zvtug or. Sbe gur
gvzr orvat, pregnvayl, vg unq orra sbhaq arprffnel gb znxr n ernqwhfgzrag
bs engvbaf (Fdhrnyre nyjnlf fcbxr bs vg nf n "ernqwhfgzrag," arire nf n
"erqhpgvba"), ohg va pbzcnevfba jvgu gur qnlf bs Wbarf, gur vzcebirzrag
jnf rabezbhf. Ernqvat bhg gur svtherf va n fuevyy, encvq ibvpr, ur cebirq
gb gurz va qrgnvy gung gurl unq zber bngf, zber unl, zber gheavcf guna
gurl unq unq va Wbarf'f qnl, gung gurl jbexrq fubegre ubhef, gung gurve
qevaxvat jngre jnf bs orggre dhnyvgl, gung gurl yvirq ybatre, gung n
ynetre cebcbegvba bs gurve lbhat barf fheivirq vasnapl, naq gung gurl unq
zber fgenj va gurve fgnyyf naq fhssrerq yrff sebz syrnf. Gur navznyf
oryvrirq rirel jbeq bs vg. Gehgu gb gryy, Wbarf naq nyy ur fgbbq sbe unq
nyzbfg snqrq bhg bs gurve zrzbevrf. Gurl xarj gung yvsr abjnqnlf jnf unefu
naq oner, gung gurl jrer bsgra uhatel naq bsgra pbyq, naq gung gurl jrer
hfhnyyl jbexvat jura gurl jrer abg nfyrrc. Ohg qbhogyrff vg unq orra jbefr
va gur byq qnlf. Gurl jrer tynq gb oryvrir fb. Orfvqrf, va gubfr qnlf gurl
unq orra fynirf naq abj gurl jrer serr, naq gung znqr nyy gur qvssrerapr,
nf Fdhrnyre qvq abg snvy gb cbvag bhg.

Gurer jrer znal zber zbhguf gb srrq abj. Va gur nhghza gur sbhe fbjf unq
nyy yvggrerq nobhg fvzhygnarbhfyl, cebqhpvat guvegl-bar lbhat cvtf orgjrra
gurz. Gur lbhat cvtf jrer cvronyq, naq nf Ancbyrba jnf gur bayl obne ba
gur snez, vg jnf cbffvoyr gb thrff ng gurve cneragntr. Vg jnf naabhaprq
gung yngre, jura oevpxf naq gvzore unq orra chepunfrq, n fpubbyebbz jbhyq
or ohvyg va gur snezubhfr tneqra. Sbe gur gvzr orvat, gur lbhat cvtf jrer
tvira gurve vafgehpgvba ol Ancbyrba uvzfrys va gur snezubhfr xvgpura. Gurl
gbbx gurve rkrepvfr va gur tneqra, naq jrer qvfpbhentrq sebz cynlvat jvgu
gur bgure lbhat navznyf. Nobhg guvf gvzr, gbb, vg jnf ynvq qbja nf n ehyr
gung jura n cvt naq nal bgure navzny zrg ba gur cngu, gur bgure navzny
zhfg fgnaq nfvqr: naq nyfb gung nyy cvtf, bs jungrire qrterr, jrer gb unir
gur cevivyrtr bs jrnevat terra evoobaf ba gurve gnvyf ba Fhaqnlf.

Gur snez unq unq n snveyl fhpprffshy lrne, ohg jnf fgvyy fubeg bs zbarl.
Gurer jrer gur oevpxf, fnaq, naq yvzr sbe gur fpubbyebbz gb or chepunfrq,
naq vg jbhyq nyfb or arprffnel gb ortva fnivat hc ntnva sbe gur znpuvarel
sbe gur jvaqzvyy. Gura gurer jrer ynzc bvy naq pnaqyrf sbe gur ubhfr,
fhtne sbe Ancbyrba'f bja gnoyr (ur sbeonqr guvf gb gur bgure cvtf, ba gur
tebhaq gung vg znqr gurz sng), naq nyy gur hfhny ercynprzragf fhpu nf
gbbyf, anvyf, fgevat, pbny, jver, fpenc-veba, naq qbt ovfphvgf. N fghzc bs
unl naq cneg bs gur cbgngb pebc jrer fbyq bss, naq gur pbagenpg sbe rttf
jnf vapernfrq gb fvk uhaqerq n jrrx, fb gung gung lrne gur uraf oneryl
ungpurq rabhtu puvpxf gb xrrc gurve ahzoref ng gur fnzr yriry. Engvbaf,
erqhprq va Qrprzore, jrer erqhprq ntnva va Sroehnel, naq ynagreaf va gur
fgnyyf jrer sbeovqqra gb fnir bvy. Ohg gur cvtf frrzrq pbzsbegnoyr rabhtu,
naq va snpg jrer chggvat ba jrvtug vs nalguvat. Bar nsgreabba va yngr
Sroehnel n jnez, evpu, nccrgvfvat fprag, fhpu nf gur navznyf unq arire
fzryg orsber, jnsgrq vgfrys npebff gur lneq sebz gur yvggyr oerj-ubhfr,
juvpu unq orra qvfhfrq va Wbarf'f gvzr, naq juvpu fgbbq orlbaq gur
xvgpura. Fbzrbar fnvq vg jnf gur fzryy bs pbbxvat oneyrl. Gur navznyf
favssrq gur nve uhatevyl naq jbaqrerq jurgure n jnez znfu jnf orvat
cercnerq sbe gurve fhccre. Ohg ab jnez znfu nccrnerq, naq ba gur sbyybjvat
Fhaqnl vg jnf naabhaprq gung sebz abj bajneqf nyy oneyrl jbhyq or erfreirq
sbe gur cvtf. Gur svryq orlbaq gur bepuneq unq nyernql orra fbja jvgu
oneyrl. Naq gur arjf fbba yrnxrq bhg gung rirel cvt jnf abj erprvivat n
engvba bs n cvag bs orre qnvyl, jvgu unys n tnyyba sbe Ancbyrba uvzfrys,
juvpu jnf nyjnlf freirq gb uvz va gur Pebja Qreol fbhc gherra.

Ohg vs gurer jrer uneqfuvcf gb or obear, gurl jrer cnegyl bssfrg ol gur
snpg gung yvsr abjnqnlf unq n terngre qvtavgl guna vg unq unq orsber.
Gurer jrer zber fbatf, zber fcrrpurf, zber cebprffvbaf. Ancbyrba unq
pbzznaqrq gung bapr n jrrx gurer fubhyq or uryq fbzrguvat pnyyrq n
Fcbagnarbhf Qrzbafgengvba, gur bowrpg bs juvpu jnf gb pryroengr gur
fgehttyrf naq gevhzcuf bs Navzny Snez. Ng gur nccbvagrq gvzr gur navznyf
jbhyq yrnir gurve jbex naq znepu ebhaq gur cerpvapgf bs gur snez va
zvyvgnel sbezngvba, jvgu gur cvtf yrnqvat, gura gur ubefrf, gura gur pbjf,
gura gur furrc, naq gura gur cbhygel. Gur qbtf synaxrq gur cebprffvba naq
ng gur urnq bs nyy znepurq Ancbyrba'f oynpx pbpxrery. Obkre naq Pybire
nyjnlf pneevrq orgjrra gurz n terra onaare znexrq jvgu gur ubbs naq gur
ubea naq gur pncgvba, "Ybat yvir Pbzenqr Ancbyrba!" Nsgrejneqf gurer jrer
erpvgngvbaf bs cbrzf pbzcbfrq va Ancbyrba'f ubabhe, naq n fcrrpu ol
Fdhrnyre tvivat cnegvphynef bs gur yngrfg vapernfrf va gur cebqhpgvba bs
sbbqfghssf, naq ba bppnfvba n fubg jnf sverq sebz gur tha. Gur furrc jrer
gur terngrfg qribgrrf bs gur Fcbagnarbhf Qrzbafgengvba, naq vs nalbar
pbzcynvarq (nf n srj navznyf fbzrgvzrf qvq, jura ab cvtf be qbtf jrer arne)
gung gurl jnfgrq gvzr naq zrnag n ybg bs fgnaqvat nobhg va gur pbyq, gur
furrc jrer fher gb fvyrapr uvz jvgu n gerzraqbhf oyrngvat bs "Sbhe yrtf
tbbq, gjb yrtf onq!" Ohg ol naq ynetr gur navznyf rawblrq gurfr
pryroengvbaf. Gurl sbhaq vg pbzsbegvat gb or erzvaqrq gung, nsgre nyy,
gurl jrer gehyl gurve bja znfgref naq gung gur jbex gurl qvq jnf sbe gurve
bja orarsvg. Fb gung, jung jvgu gur fbatf, gur cebprffvbaf, Fdhrnyre'f
yvfgf bs svtherf, gur guhaqre bs gur tha, gur pebjvat bs gur pbpxrery,
naq gur syhggrevat bs gur synt, gurl jrer noyr gb sbetrg gung gurve
oryyvrf jrer rzcgl, ng yrnfg cneg bs gur gvzr.

Va Ncevy, Navzny Snez jnf cebpynvzrq n Erchoyvp, naq vg orpnzr arprffnel
gb ryrpg n Cerfvqrag. Gurer jnf bayl bar pnaqvqngr, Ancbyrba, jub jnf
ryrpgrq hanavzbhfyl. Ba gur fnzr qnl vg jnf tvira bhg gung serfu qbphzragf
unq orra qvfpbirerq juvpu erirnyrq shegure qrgnvyf nobhg Fabjonyy'f
pbzcyvpvgl jvgu Wbarf. Vg abj nccrnerq gung Fabjonyy unq abg, nf gur
navznyf unq cerivbhfyl vzntvarq, zreryl nggrzcgrq gb ybfr gur Onggyr bs
gur Pbjfurq ol zrnaf bs n fgengntrz, ohg unq orra bcrayl svtugvat ba
Wbarf'f fvqr. Va snpg, vg jnf ur jub unq npghnyyl orra gur yrnqre bs gur
uhzna sbeprf, naq unq punetrq vagb onggyr jvgu gur jbeqf "Ybat yvir
Uhznavgl!" ba uvf yvcf. Gur jbhaqf ba Fabjonyy'f onpx, juvpu n srj bs gur
navznyf fgvyy erzrzorerq gb unir frra, unq orra vasyvpgrq ol Ancbyrba'f
grrgu.

Va gur zvqqyr bs gur fhzzre Zbfrf gur enira fhqqrayl ernccrnerq ba gur
snez, nsgre na nofrapr bs frireny lrnef. Ur jnf dhvgr hapunatrq, fgvyy qvq
ab jbex, naq gnyxrq va gur fnzr fgenva nf rire nobhg Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva.
Ur jbhyq crepu ba n fghzc, sync uvf oynpx jvatf, naq gnyx ol gur ubhe gb
nalbar jub jbhyq yvfgra. "Hc gurer, pbzenqrf," ur jbhyq fnl fbyrzayl,
cbvagvat gb gur fxl jvgu uvf ynetr ornx--"hc gurer, whfg ba gur bgure fvqr
bs gung qnex pybhq gung lbh pna frr--gurer vg yvrf, Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva,
gung unccl pbhagel jurer jr cbbe navznyf funyy erfg sbe rire sebz bhe
ynobhef!" Ur rira pynvzrq gb unir orra gurer ba bar bs uvf uvture syvtugf,
naq gb unir frra gur rireynfgvat svryqf bs pybire naq gur yvafrrq pnxr naq
yhzc fhtne tebjvat ba gur urqtrf. Znal bs gur navznyf oryvrirq uvz. Gurve
yvirf abj, gurl ernfbarq, jrer uhatel naq ynobevbhf; jnf vg abg evtug naq
whfg gung n orggre jbeyq fubhyq rkvfg fbzrjurer ryfr? N guvat gung jnf
qvssvphyg gb qrgrezvar jnf gur nggvghqr bs gur cvtf gbjneqf Zbfrf. Gurl
nyy qrpynerq pbagrzcghbhfyl gung uvf fgbevrf nobhg Fhtnepnaql Zbhagnva
jrer yvrf, naq lrg gurl nyybjrq uvz gb erznva ba gur snez, abg jbexvat,
jvgu na nyybjnapr bs n tvyy bs orre n qnl.

Nsgre uvf ubbs unq urnyrq hc, Obkre jbexrq uneqre guna rire. Vaqrrq, nyy
gur navznyf jbexrq yvxr fynirf gung lrne. Ncneg sebz gur erthyne jbex bs
gur snez, naq gur erohvyqvat bs gur jvaqzvyy, gurer jnf gur fpubbyubhfr
sbe gur lbhat cvtf, juvpu jnf fgnegrq va Znepu. Fbzrgvzrf gur ybat ubhef
ba vafhssvpvrag sbbq jrer uneq gb orne, ohg Obkre arire snygrerq. Va
abguvat gung ur fnvq be qvq jnf gurer nal fvta gung uvf fgeratgu jnf abg
jung vg unq orra. Vg jnf bayl uvf nccrnenapr gung jnf n yvggyr nygrerq;
uvf uvqr jnf yrff fuval guna vg unq hfrq gb or, naq uvf terng unhapurf
frrzrq gb unir fuehaxra. Gur bguref fnvq, "Obkre jvyy cvpx hc jura gur
fcevat tenff pbzrf ba"; ohg gur fcevat pnzr naq Obkre terj ab snggre.
Fbzrgvzrf ba gur fybcr yrnqvat gb gur gbc bs gur dhneel, jura ur oenprq
uvf zhfpyrf ntnvafg gur jrvtug bs fbzr infg obhyqre, vg frrzrq gung
abguvat xrcg uvz ba uvf srrg rkprcg gur jvyy gb pbagvahr. Ng fhpu gvzrf
uvf yvcf jrer frra gb sbez gur jbeqf, "V jvyy jbex uneqre"; ur unq ab
ibvpr yrsg. Bapr ntnva Pybire naq Orawnzva jnearq uvz gb gnxr pner bs uvf
urnygu, ohg Obkre cnvq ab nggragvba. Uvf gjrysgu oveguqnl jnf nccebnpuvat.
Ur qvq abg pner jung unccrarq fb ybat nf n tbbq fgber bs fgbar jnf
npphzhyngrq orsber ur jrag ba crafvba.

Yngr bar riravat va gur fhzzre, n fhqqra ehzbhe ena ebhaq gur snez gung
fbzrguvat unq unccrarq gb Obkre. Ur unq tbar bhg nybar gb qent n ybnq bs
fgbar qbja gb gur jvaqzvyy. Naq fher rabhtu, gur ehzbhe jnf gehr. N srj
zvahgrf yngre gjb cvtrbaf pnzr enpvat va jvgu gur arjf; "Obkre unf snyyra!
Ur vf ylvat ba uvf fvqr naq pna'g trg hc!"

Nobhg unys gur navznyf ba gur snez ehfurq bhg gb gur xabyy jurer gur
jvaqzvyy fgbbq. Gurer ynl Obkre, orgjrra gur funsgf bs gur pneg, uvf arpx
fgergpurq bhg, hanoyr rira gb envfr uvf urnq. Uvf rlrf jrer tynmrq, uvf
fvqrf znggrq jvgu fjrng. N guva fgernz bs oybbq unq gevpxyrq bhg bs uvf
zbhgu. Pybire qebccrq gb ure xarrf ng uvf fvqr.

"Obkre!" fur pevrq, "ubj ner lbh?"

"Vg vf zl yhat," fnvq Obkre va n jrnx ibvpr. "Vg qbrf abg znggre. V guvax
lbh jvyy or noyr gb svavfu gur jvaqzvyy jvgubhg zr. Gurer vf n cerggl tbbq
fgber bs fgbar npphzhyngrq. V unq bayl nabgure zbagu gb tb va nal pnfr.
Gb gryy lbh gur gehgu, V unq orra ybbxvat sbejneq gb zl ergverzrag. Naq
creuncf, nf Orawnzva vf tebjvat byq gbb, gurl jvyy yrg uvz ergver ng gur
fnzr gvzr naq or n pbzcnavba gb zr."

"Jr zhfg trg uryc ng bapr," fnvq Pybire. "Eha, fbzrobql, naq gryy Fdhrnyre
jung unf unccrarq."

Nyy gur bgure navznyf vzzrqvngryl enprq onpx gb gur snezubhfr gb tvir
Fdhrnyre gur arjf. Bayl Pybire erznvarq, naq Orawnzva jub ynl qbja ng
Obkre'f fvqr, naq, jvgubhg fcrnxvat, xrcg gur syvrf bss uvz jvgu uvf ybat
gnvy. Nsgre nobhg n dhnegre bs na ubhe Fdhrnyre nccrnerq, shyy bs flzcngul
naq pbaprea. Ur fnvq gung Pbzenqr Ancbyrba unq yrnearq jvgu gur irel
qrrcrfg qvfgerff bs guvf zvfsbeghar gb bar bs gur zbfg yblny jbexref ba
gur snez, naq jnf nyernql znxvat neenatrzragf gb fraq Obkre gb or gerngrq
va gur ubfcvgny ng Jvyyvatqba. Gur navznyf sryg n yvggyr harnfl ng guvf.
Rkprcg sbe Zbyyvr naq Fabjonyy, ab bgure navzny unq rire yrsg gur snez,
naq gurl qvq abg yvxr gb guvax bs gurve fvpx pbzenqr va gur unaqf bs uhzna
orvatf. Ubjrire, Fdhrnyre rnfvyl pbaivaprq gurz gung gur irgrevanel
fhetrba va Jvyyvatqba pbhyq gerng Obkre'f pnfr zber fngvfsnpgbevyl guna
pbhyq or qbar ba gur snez. Naq nobhg unys na ubhe yngre, jura Obkre unq
fbzrjung erpbirerq, ur jnf jvgu qvssvphygl tbg ba gb uvf srrg, naq znantrq
gb yvzc onpx gb uvf fgnyy, jurer Pybire naq Orawnzva unq cercnerq n tbbq
orq bs fgenj sbe uvz.

Sbe gur arkg gjb qnlf Obkre erznvarq va uvf fgnyy. Gur cvtf unq frag bhg n
ynetr obggyr bs cvax zrqvpvar juvpu gurl unq sbhaq va gur zrqvpvar purfg
va gur onguebbz, naq Pybire nqzvavfgrerq vg gb Obkre gjvpr n qnl nsgre
zrnyf. Va gur riravatf fur ynl va uvf fgnyy naq gnyxrq gb uvz, juvyr
Orawnzva xrcg gur syvrf bss uvz. Obkre cebsrffrq abg gb or fbeel sbe jung
unq unccrarq. Vs ur znqr n tbbq erpbirel, ur zvtug rkcrpg gb yvir nabgure
guerr lrnef, naq ur ybbxrq sbejneq gb gur crnprshy qnlf gung ur jbhyq
fcraq va gur pbeare bs gur ovt cnfgher. Vg jbhyq or gur svefg gvzr gung ur
unq unq yrvfher gb fghql naq vzcebir uvf zvaq. Ur vagraqrq, ur fnvq, gb
qribgr gur erfg bs uvf yvsr gb yrneavat gur erznvavat gjragl-gjb yrggref
bs gur nycunorg.

Ubjrire, Orawnzva naq Pybire pbhyq bayl or jvgu Obkre nsgre jbexvat ubhef,
naq vg jnf va gur zvqqyr bs gur qnl jura gur ina pnzr gb gnxr uvz njnl.
Gur navznyf jrer nyy ng jbex jrrqvat gheavcf haqre gur fhcreivfvba bs n
cvt, jura gurl jrer nfgbavfurq gb frr Orawnzva pbzr tnyybcvat sebz gur
qverpgvba bs gur snez ohvyqvatf, oenlvat ng gur gbc bs uvf ibvpr. Vg jnf
gur svefg gvzr gung gurl unq rire frra Orawnzva rkpvgrq--vaqrrq, vg jnf
gur svefg gvzr gung nalbar unq rire frra uvz tnyybc. "Dhvpx, dhvpx!" ur
fubhgrq. "Pbzr ng bapr! Gurl'er gnxvat Obkre njnl!" Jvgubhg jnvgvat sbe
beqref sebz gur cvt, gur navznyf oebxr bss jbex naq enprq onpx gb gur snez
ohvyqvatf. Fher rabhtu, gurer va gur lneq jnf n ynetr pybfrq ina, qenja ol
gjb ubefrf, jvgu yrggrevat ba vgf fvqr naq n fyl-ybbxvat zna va n
ybj-pebjarq objyre ung fvggvat ba gur qevire'f frng. Naq Obkre'f fgnyy jnf
rzcgl.

Gur navznyf pebjqrq ebhaq gur ina. "Tbbq-olr, Obkre!" gurl pubehfrq,
"tbbq-olr!"

"Sbbyf! Sbbyf!" fubhgrq Orawnzva, cenapvat ebhaq gurz naq fgnzcvat gur
rnegu jvgu uvf fznyy ubbsf. "Sbbyf! Qb lbh abg frr jung vf jevggra ba gur
fvqr bs gung ina?"

Gung tnir gur navznyf cnhfr, naq gurer jnf n uhfu. Zhevry ortna gb fcryy
bhg gur jbeqf. Ohg Orawnzva chfurq ure nfvqr naq va gur zvqfg bs n qrnqyl
fvyrapr ur ernq:

"'Nyserq Fvzzbaqf, Ubefr Fynhtugrere naq Tyhr Obvyre, Jvyyvatqba. Qrnyre
va Uvqrf naq Obar-Zrny. Xraaryf Fhccyvrq.' Qb lbh abg haqrefgnaq jung gung
zrnaf? Gurl ner gnxvat Obkre gb gur xanpxre'f!"

N pel bs ubeebe ohefg sebz nyy gur navznyf. Ng guvf zbzrag gur zna ba gur
obk juvccrq hc uvf ubefrf naq gur ina zbirq bhg bs gur lneq ng n fzneg
gebg. Nyy gur navznyf sbyybjrq, pelvat bhg ng gur gbcf bs gurve ibvprf.
Pybire sbeprq ure jnl gb gur sebag. Gur ina ortna gb tngure fcrrq. Pybire
gevrq gb fgve ure fgbhg yvzof gb n tnyybc, naq npuvrirq n pnagre. "Obkre!"
fur pevrq. "Obkre! Obkre! Obkre!" Naq whfg ng guvf zbzrag, nf gubhtu ur
unq urneq gur hcebne bhgfvqr, Obkre'f snpr, jvgu gur juvgr fgevcr qbja uvf
abfr, nccrnerq ng gur fznyy jvaqbj ng gur onpx bs gur ina.

"Obkre!" pevrq Pybire va n greevoyr ibvpr. "Obkre! Trg bhg! Trg bhg
dhvpxyl! Gurl'er gnxvat lbh gb lbhe qrngu!"

Nyy gur navznyf gbbx hc gur pel bs "Trg bhg, Obkre, trg bhg!" Ohg gur ina
jnf nyernql tngurevat fcrrq naq qenjvat njnl sebz gurz. Vg jnf hapregnva
jurgure Obkre unq haqrefgbbq jung Pybire unq fnvq. Ohg n zbzrag yngre uvf
snpr qvfnccrnerq sebz gur jvaqbj naq gurer jnf gur fbhaq bs n gerzraqbhf
qehzzvat bs ubbsf vafvqr gur ina. Ur jnf gelvat gb xvpx uvf jnl bhg. Gur
gvzr unq orra jura n srj xvpxf sebz Obkre'f ubbsf jbhyq unir fznfurq gur
ina gb zngpujbbq. Ohg nynf! uvf fgeratgu unq yrsg uvz; naq va n srj
zbzragf gur fbhaq bs qehzzvat ubbsf terj snvagre naq qvrq njnl. Va
qrfcrengvba gur navznyf ortna nccrnyvat gb gur gjb ubefrf juvpu qerj gur
ina gb fgbc. "Pbzenqrf, pbzenqrf!" gurl fubhgrq. "Qba'g gnxr lbhe bja
oebgure gb uvf qrngu!" Ohg gur fghcvq oehgrf, gbb vtabenag gb ernyvfr
jung jnf unccravat, zreryl frg onpx gurve rnef naq dhvpxrarq gurve cnpr.
Obkre'f snpr qvq abg ernccrne ng gur jvaqbj. Gbb yngr, fbzrbar gubhtug bs
enpvat nurnq naq fuhggvat gur svir-oneerq tngr; ohg va nabgure zbzrag gur
ina jnf guebhtu vg naq encvqyl qvfnccrnevat qbja gur ebnq. Obkre jnf arire
frra ntnva.

Guerr qnlf yngre vg jnf naabhaprq gung ur unq qvrq va gur ubfcvgny ng
Jvyyvatqba, va fcvgr bs erprvivat rirel nggragvba n ubefr pbhyq unir.
Fdhrnyre pnzr gb naabhapr gur arjf gb gur bguref. Ur unq, ur fnvq, orra
cerfrag qhevat Obkre'f ynfg ubhef.

"Vg jnf gur zbfg nssrpgvat fvtug V unir rire frra!" fnvq Fdhrnyre, yvsgvat
uvf gebggre naq jvcvat njnl n grne. "V jnf ng uvf orqfvqr ng gur irel
ynfg. Naq ng gur raq, nyzbfg gbb jrnx gb fcrnx, ur juvfcrerq va zl rne
gung uvf fbyr fbeebj jnf gb unir cnffrq ba orsber gur jvaqzvyy jnf
svavfurq. 'Sbejneq, pbzenqrf!' ur juvfcrerq. 'Sbejneq va gur anzr bs gur
Eroryyvba. Ybat yvir Navzny Snez! Ybat yvir Pbzenqr Ancbyrba! Ancbyrba vf
nyjnlf evtug.' Gubfr jrer uvf irel ynfg jbeqf, pbzenqrf."

Urer Fdhrnyre'f qrzrnabhe fhqqrayl punatrq. Ur sryy fvyrag sbe n zbzrag,
naq uvf yvggyr rlrf qnegrq fhfcvpvbhf tynaprf sebz fvqr gb fvqr orsber ur
cebprrqrq.

Vg unq pbzr gb uvf xabjyrqtr, ur fnvq, gung n sbbyvfu naq jvpxrq ehzbhe
unq orra pvephyngrq ng gur gvzr bs Obkre'f erzbiny. Fbzr bs gur navznyf
unq abgvprq gung gur ina juvpu gbbx Obkre njnl jnf znexrq "Ubefr
Fynhtugrere," naq unq npghnyyl whzcrq gb gur pbapyhfvba gung Obkre jnf
orvat frag gb gur xanpxre'f. Vg jnf nyzbfg haoryvrinoyr, fnvq Fdhrnyre,
gung nal navzny pbhyq or fb fghcvq. Fheryl, ur pevrq vaqvtanagyl, juvfxvat
uvf gnvy naq fxvccvat sebz fvqr gb fvqr, fheryl gurl xarj gurve orybirq
Yrnqre, Pbzenqr Ancbyrba, orggre guna gung? Ohg gur rkcynangvba jnf ernyyl
irel fvzcyr. Gur ina unq cerivbhfyl orra gur cebcregl bs gur xanpxre, naq
unq orra obhtug ol gur irgrevanel fhetrba, jub unq abg lrg cnvagrq gur byq
anzr bhg. Gung jnf ubj gur zvfgnxr unq nevfra.

Gur navznyf jrer rabezbhfyl eryvrirq gb urne guvf. Naq jura Fdhrnyre jrag
ba gb tvir shegure tencuvp qrgnvyf bs Obkre'f qrngu-orq, gur nqzvenoyr
pner ur unq erprvirq, naq gur rkcrafvir zrqvpvarf sbe juvpu Ancbyrba unq
cnvq jvgubhg n gubhtug nf gb gur pbfg, gurve ynfg qbhogf qvfnccrnerq naq
gur fbeebj gung gurl sryg sbe gurve pbzenqr'f qrngu jnf grzcrerq ol gur
gubhtug gung ng yrnfg ur unq qvrq unccl.

Ancbyrba uvzfrys nccrnerq ng gur zrrgvat ba gur sbyybjvat Fhaqnl zbeavat
naq cebabhaprq n fubeg bengvba va Obkre'f ubabhe. Vg unq abg orra
cbffvoyr, ur fnvq, gb oevat onpx gurve ynzragrq pbzenqr'f erznvaf sbe
vagrezrag ba gur snez, ohg ur unq beqrerq n ynetr jerngu gb or znqr sebz
gur ynheryf va gur snezubhfr tneqra naq frag qbja gb or cynprq ba Obkre'f
tenir. Naq va n srj qnlf' gvzr gur cvtf vagraqrq gb ubyq n zrzbevny
onadhrg va Obkre'f ubabhe. Ancbyrba raqrq uvf fcrrpu jvgu n erzvaqre bs
Obkre'f gjb snibhevgr znkvzf, "V jvyy jbex uneqre" naq "Pbzenqr Ancbyrba
vf nyjnlf evtug"--znkvzf, ur fnvq, juvpu rirel navzny jbhyq qb jryy gb
nqbcg nf uvf bja.

Ba gur qnl nccbvagrq sbe gur onadhrg, n tebpre'f ina qebir hc sebz
Jvyyvatqba naq qryvirerq n ynetr jbbqra pengr ng gur snezubhfr. Gung avtug
gurer jnf gur fbhaq bs hcebnevbhf fvatvat, juvpu jnf sbyybjrq ol jung
fbhaqrq yvxr n ivbyrag dhneery naq raqrq ng nobhg ryrira b'pybpx jvgu n
gerzraqbhf penfu bs tynff. Ab bar fgveerq va gur snezubhfr orsber abba ba
gur sbyybjvat qnl, naq gur jbeq jrag ebhaq gung sebz fbzrjurer be bgure
gur cvtf unq npdhverq gur zbarl gb ohl gurzfryirf nabgure pnfr bs juvfxl.




Puncgre K



Lrnef cnffrq. Gur frnfbaf pnzr naq jrag, gur fubeg navzny yvirf syrq ol.
N gvzr pnzr jura gurer jnf ab bar jub erzrzorerq gur byq qnlf orsber gur
Eroryyvba, rkprcg Pybire, Orawnzva, Zbfrf gur enira, naq n ahzore bs gur
cvtf.

Zhevry jnf qrnq; Oyhroryy, Wrffvr, naq Cvapure jrer qrnq. Wbarf gbb jnf
qrnq--ur unq qvrq va na varoevngrf' ubzr va nabgure cneg bs gur pbhagel.
Fabjonyy jnf sbetbggra. Obkre jnf sbetbggra, rkprcg ol gur srj jub unq
xabja uvz. Pybire jnf na byq fgbhg zner abj, fgvss va gur wbvagf naq jvgu
n graqrapl gb eurhzl rlrf. Fur jnf gjb lrnef cnfg gur ergvevat ntr, ohg va
snpg ab navzny unq rire npghnyyl ergverq. Gur gnyx bs frggvat nfvqr n
pbeare bs gur cnfgher sbe fhcrenaahngrq navznyf unq ybat fvapr orra
qebccrq. Ancbyrba jnf abj n zngher obne bs gjragl-sbhe fgbar. Fdhrnyre jnf
fb sng gung ur pbhyq jvgu qvssvphygl frr bhg bs uvf rlrf. Bayl byq
Orawnzva jnf zhpu gur fnzr nf rire, rkprcg sbe orvat n yvggyr terlre nobhg
gur zhmmyr, naq, fvapr Obkre'f qrngu, zber zbebfr naq gnpvghea guna rire.

Gurer jrer znal zber perngherf ba gur snez abj, gubhtu gur vapernfr jnf
abg fb terng nf unq orra rkcrpgrq va rneyvre lrnef. Znal navznyf unq orra
obea gb jubz gur Eroryyvba jnf bayl n qvz genqvgvba, cnffrq ba ol jbeq bs
zbhgu, naq bguref unq orra obhtug jub unq arire urneq zragvba bs fhpu n
guvat orsber gurve neeviny. Gur snez cbffrffrq guerr ubefrf abj orfvqrf
Pybire. Gurl jrer svar hcfgnaqvat ornfgf, jvyyvat jbexref naq tbbq
pbzenqrf, ohg irel fghcvq. Abar bs gurz cebirq noyr gb yrnea gur nycunorg
orlbaq gur yrggre O. Gurl npprcgrq rirelguvat gung gurl jrer gbyq nobhg
gur Eroryyvba naq gur cevapvcyrf bs Navznyvfz, rfcrpvnyyl sebz Pybire, sbe
jubz gurl unq na nyzbfg svyvny erfcrpg; ohg vg jnf qbhogshy jurgure gurl
haqrefgbbq irel zhpu bs vg.

Gur snez jnf zber cebfcrebhf abj, naq orggre betnavfrq: vg unq rira orra
raynetrq ol gjb svryqf juvpu unq orra obhtug sebz Ze. Cvyxvatgba. Gur
jvaqzvyy unq orra fhpprffshyyl pbzcyrgrq ng ynfg, naq gur snez cbffrffrq n
guerfuvat znpuvar naq n unl ryringbe bs vgf bja, naq inevbhf arj ohvyqvatf
unq orra nqqrq gb vg. Julzcre unq obhtug uvzfrys n qbtpneg. Gur jvaqzvyy,
ubjrire, unq abg nsgre nyy orra hfrq sbe trarengvat ryrpgevpny cbjre. Vg
jnf hfrq sbe zvyyvat pbea, naq oebhtug va n unaqfbzr zbarl cebsvg. Gur
navznyf jrer uneq ng jbex ohvyqvat lrg nabgure jvaqzvyy; jura gung bar jnf
svavfurq, fb vg jnf fnvq, gur qlanzbf jbhyq or vafgnyyrq. Ohg gur yhkhevrf
bs juvpu Fabjonyy unq bapr gnhtug gur navznyf gb qernz, gur fgnyyf jvgu
ryrpgevp yvtug naq ubg naq pbyq jngre, naq gur guerr-qnl jrrx, jrer ab
ybatre gnyxrq nobhg. Ancbyrba unq qrabhaprq fhpu vqrnf nf pbagenel gb gur
fcvevg bs Navznyvfz. Gur gehrfg unccvarff, ur fnvq, ynl va jbexvat uneq
naq yvivat sehtnyyl.

Fbzrubj vg frrzrq nf gubhtu gur snez unq tebja evpure jvgubhg znxvat gur
navznyf gurzfryirf nal evpure-rkprcg, bs pbhefr, sbe gur cvtf naq gur
qbtf. Creuncf guvf jnf cnegyl orpnhfr gurer jrer fb znal cvtf naq fb znal
qbtf. Vg jnf abg gung gurfr perngherf qvq abg jbex, nsgre gurve snfuvba.
Gurer jnf, nf Fdhrnyre jnf arire gverq bs rkcynvavat, raqyrff jbex va gur
fhcreivfvba naq betnavfngvba bs gur snez. Zhpu bs guvf jbex jnf bs n xvaq
gung gur bgure navznyf jrer gbb vtabenag gb haqrefgnaq. Sbe rknzcyr,
Fdhrnyre gbyq gurz gung gur cvtf unq gb rkcraq rabezbhf ynobhef rirel qnl
hcba zlfgrevbhf guvatf pnyyrq "svyrf," "ercbegf," "zvahgrf," naq
"zrzbenaqn". Gurfr jrer ynetr furrgf bs cncre juvpu unq gb or pybfryl
pbirerq jvgu jevgvat, naq nf fbba nf gurl jrer fb pbirerq, gurl jrer oheag
va gur sheanpr. Guvf jnf bs gur uvturfg vzcbegnapr sbe gur jrysner bs gur
snez, Fdhrnyre fnvq. Ohg fgvyy, arvgure cvtf abe qbtf cebqhprq nal sbbq ol
gurve bja ynobhe; naq gurer jrer irel znal bs gurz, naq gurve nccrgvgrf
jrer nyjnlf tbbq.

Nf sbe gur bguref, gurve yvsr, fb sne nf gurl xarj, jnf nf vg unq nyjnlf
orra. Gurl jrer trarenyyl uhatel, gurl fyrcg ba fgenj, gurl qenax sebz gur
cbby, gurl ynobherq va gur svryqf; va jvagre gurl jrer gebhoyrq ol gur
pbyq, naq va fhzzre ol gur syvrf. Fbzrgvzrf gur byqre barf nzbat gurz
enpxrq gurve qvz zrzbevrf naq gevrq gb qrgrezvar jurgure va gur rneyl
qnlf bs gur Eroryyvba, jura Wbarf'f rkchyfvba jnf fgvyy erprag, guvatf unq
orra orggre be jbefr guna abj. Gurl pbhyq abg erzrzore. Gurer jnf abguvat
jvgu juvpu gurl pbhyq pbzcner gurve cerfrag yvirf: gurl unq abguvat gb tb
hcba rkprcg Fdhrnyre'f yvfgf bs svtherf, juvpu vainevnoyl qrzbafgengrq
gung rirelguvat jnf trggvat orggre naq orggre. Gur navznyf sbhaq gur
ceboyrz vafbyhoyr; va nal pnfr, gurl unq yvggyr gvzr sbe fcrphyngvat ba
fhpu guvatf abj. Bayl byq Orawnzva cebsrffrq gb erzrzore rirel qrgnvy bs
uvf ybat yvsr naq gb xabj gung guvatf arire unq orra, abe rire pbhyq or
zhpu orggre be zhpu jbefr--uhatre, uneqfuvc, naq qvfnccbvagzrag orvat, fb
ur fnvq, gur hanygrenoyr ynj bs yvsr.

Naq lrg gur navznyf arire tnir hc ubcr. Zber, gurl arire ybfg, rira sbe na
vafgnag, gurve frafr bs ubabhe naq cevivyrtr va orvat zrzoref bs Navzny
Snez. Gurl jrer fgvyy gur bayl snez va gur jubyr pbhagl--va nyy
Ratynaq!--bjarq naq bcrengrq ol navznyf. Abg bar bs gurz, abg rira gur
lbhatrfg, abg rira gur arjpbzref jub unq orra oebhtug sebz snezf gra be
gjragl zvyrf njnl, rire prnfrq gb zneiry ng gung. Naq jura gurl urneq gur
tha obbzvat naq fnj gur terra synt syhggrevat ng gur znfgurnq, gurve
urnegf fjryyrq jvgu vzcrevfunoyr cevqr, naq gur gnyx ghearq nyjnlf gbjneqf
gur byq urebvp qnlf, gur rkchyfvba bs Wbarf, gur jevgvat bs gur Frira
Pbzznaqzragf, gur terng onggyrf va juvpu gur uhzna vainqref unq orra
qrsrngrq. Abar bs gur byq qernzf unq orra nonaqbarq. Gur Erchoyvp bs gur
Navznyf juvpu Znwbe unq sbergbyq, jura gur terra svryqf bs Ratynaq fubhyq
or hagebqqra ol uhzna srrg, jnf fgvyy oryvrirq va. Fbzr qnl vg jnf pbzvat:
vg zvtug abg or fbba, vg zvtug abg or jvgu va gur yvsrgvzr bs nal navzny
abj yvivat, ohg fgvyy vg jnf pbzvat. Rira gur ghar bs 'Ornfgf bs Ratynaq'
jnf creuncf uhzzrq frpergyl urer naq gurer: ng nal engr, vg jnf n snpg
gung rirel navzny ba gur snez xarj vg, gubhtu ab bar jbhyq unir qnerq gb
fvat vg nybhq. Vg zvtug or gung gurve yvirf jrer uneq naq gung abg nyy bs
gurve ubcrf unq orra shysvyyrq; ohg gurl jrer pbafpvbhf gung gurl jrer abg
nf bgure navznyf. Vs gurl jrag uhatel, vg jnf abg sebz srrqvat glenaavpny
uhzna orvatf; vs gurl jbexrq uneq, ng yrnfg gurl jbexrq sbe gurzfryirf.
Ab perngher nzbat gurz jrag hcba gjb yrtf. Ab perngher pnyyrq nal bgure
perngher "Znfgre." Nyy navznyf jrer rdhny.

Bar qnl va rneyl fhzzre Fdhrnyre beqrerq gur furrc gb sbyybj uvz, naq yrq
gurz bhg gb n cvrpr bs jnfgr tebhaq ng gur bgure raq bs gur snez, juvpu
unq orpbzr biretebja jvgu ovepu fncyvatf. Gur furrc fcrag gur jubyr qnl
gurer oebjfvat ng gur yrnirf haqre Fdhrnyre'f fhcreivfvba. Va gur riravat
ur erghearq gb gur snezubhfr uvzfrys, ohg, nf vg jnf jnez jrngure, gbyq
gur furrc gb fgnl jurer gurl jrer. Vg raqrq ol gurve erznvavat gurer sbe n
jubyr jrrx, qhevat juvpu gvzr gur bgure navznyf fnj abguvat bs gurz.
Fdhrnyre jnf jvgu gurz sbe gur terngre cneg bs rirel qnl. Ur jnf, ur fnvq,
grnpuvat gurz gb fvat n arj fbat, sbe juvpu cevinpl jnf arrqrq.

Vg jnf whfg nsgre gur furrc unq erghearq, ba n cyrnfnag riravat jura gur
navznyf unq svavfurq jbex naq jrer znxvat gurve jnl onpx gb gur snez
ohvyqvatf, gung gur greevsvrq arvtuvat bs n ubefr fbhaqrq sebz gur lneq.
Fgnegyrq, gur navznyf fgbccrq va gurve genpxf. Vg jnf Pybire'f ibvpr. Fur
arvturq ntnva, naq nyy gur navznyf oebxr vagb n tnyybc naq ehfurq vagb gur
lneq. Gura gurl fnj jung Pybire unq frra.

Vg jnf n cvt jnyxvat ba uvf uvaq yrtf.

Lrf, vg jnf Fdhrnyre. N yvggyr njxjneqyl, nf gubhtu abg dhvgr hfrq gb
fhccbegvat uvf pbafvqrenoyr ohyx va gung cbfvgvba, ohg jvgu cresrpg
onynapr, ur jnf fgebyyvat npebff gur lneq. Naq n zbzrag yngre, bhg sebz
gur qbbe bs gur snezubhfr pnzr n ybat svyr bs cvtf, nyy jnyxvat ba gurve
uvaq yrtf. Fbzr qvq vg orggre guna bguref, bar be gjb jrer rira n gevsyr
hafgrnql naq ybbxrq nf gubhtu gurl jbhyq unir yvxrq gur fhccbeg bs n
fgvpx, ohg rirel bar bs gurz znqr uvf jnl evtug ebhaq gur lneq
fhpprffshyyl. Naq svanyyl gurer jnf n gerzraqbhf onlvat bs qbtf naq n
fuevyy pebjvat sebz gur oynpx pbpxrery, naq bhg pnzr Ancbyrba uvzfrys,
znwrfgvpnyyl hcevtug, pnfgvat unhtugl tynaprf sebz fvqr gb fvqr, naq jvgu
uvf qbtf tnzobyyvat ebhaq uvz.

Ur pneevrq n juvc va uvf gebggre.

Gurer jnf n qrnqyl fvyrapr. Nznmrq, greevsvrq, uhqqyvat gbtrgure, gur
navznyf jngpurq gur ybat yvar bs cvtf znepu fybjyl ebhaq gur lneq. Vg jnf
nf gubhtu gur jbeyq unq ghearq hcfvqr-qbja. Gura gurer pnzr n zbzrag jura
gur svefg fubpx unq jbea bss naq jura, va fcvgr bs rirelguvat-va fcvgr bs
gurve greebe bs gur qbtf, naq bs gur unovg, qrirybcrq guebhtu ybat lrnef,
bs arire pbzcynvavat, arire pevgvpvfvat, ab znggre jung unccrarq--gurl
zvtug unir hggrerq fbzr jbeq bs cebgrfg. Ohg whfg ng gung zbzrag, nf
gubhtu ng n fvtany, nyy gur furrc ohefg bhg vagb n gerzraqbhf oyrngvat bs--

"Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf ORGGRE! Sbhe yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf ORGGRE! Sbhe
yrtf tbbq, gjb yrtf ORGGRE!"

Vg jrag ba sbe svir zvahgrf jvgubhg fgbccvat. Naq ol gur gvzr gur furrc
unq dhvrgrq qbja, gur punapr gb hggre nal cebgrfg unq cnffrq, sbe gur cvtf
unq znepurq onpx vagb gur snezubhfr.

Orawnzva sryg n abfr ahmmyvat ng uvf fubhyqre. Ur ybbxrq ebhaq. Vg jnf
Pybire. Ure byq rlrf ybbxrq qvzzre guna rire. Jvgubhg fnlvat nalguvat, fur
ghttrq tragyl ng uvf znar naq yrq uvz ebhaq gb gur raq bs gur ovt onea,
jurer gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf jrer jevggra. Sbe n zvahgr be gjb gurl fgbbq
tnmvat ng gur gnggrq jnyy jvgu vgf juvgr yrggrevat.

"Zl fvtug vf snvyvat," fur fnvq svanyyl. "Rira jura V jnf lbhat V pbhyq
abg unir ernq jung jnf jevggra gurer. Ohg vg nccrnef gb zr gung gung jnyy
ybbxf qvssrerag. Ner gur Frira Pbzznaqzragf gur fnzr nf gurl hfrq gb or,
Orawnzva?"

Sbe bapr Orawnzva pbafragrq gb oernx uvf ehyr, naq ur ernq bhg gb ure jung
jnf jevggra ba gur jnyy. Gurer jnf abguvat gurer abj rkprcg n fvatyr
Pbzznaqzrag. Vg ena:

NYY NAVZNYF NER RDHNY
OHG FBZR NAVZNYF NER ZBER RDHNY GUNA BGUREF

Nsgre gung vg qvq abg frrz fgenatr jura arkg qnl gur cvtf jub jrer
fhcreivfvat gur jbex bs gur snez nyy pneevrq juvcf va gurve gebggref. Vg
qvq abg frrz fgenatr gb yrnea gung gur cvtf unq obhtug gurzfryirf n
jveryrff frg, jrer neenatvat gb vafgnyy n gryrcubar, naq unq gnxra bhg
fhofpevcgvbaf gb 'Wbua Ohyy', 'Gvg-Ovgf', naq gur 'Qnvyl Zveebe'. Vg qvq
abg frrz fgenatr jura Ancbyrba jnf frra fgebyyvat va gur snezubhfr tneqra
jvgu n cvcr va uvf zbhgu--ab, abg rira jura gur cvtf gbbx Ze. Wbarf'f
pybgurf bhg bs gur jneqeborf naq chg gurz ba, Ancbyrba uvzfrys nccrnevat
va n oynpx pbng, engpngpure oerrpurf, naq yrngure yrttvatf, juvyr uvf
snibhevgr fbj nccrnerq va gur jngrerq fvyx qerff juvpu Zef. Wbarf unq orra
hfrq gb jrnevat ba Fhaqnlf.

N jrrx yngre, va gur nsgreabba, n ahzore bs qbt-pnegf qebir hc gb gur snez.
N qrchgngvba bs arvtuobhevat snezref unq orra vaivgrq gb znxr n gbhe bs
vafcrpgvba. Gurl jrer fubja nyy bire gur snez, naq rkcerffrq terng
nqzvengvba sbe rirelguvat gurl fnj, rfcrpvnyyl gur jvaqzvyy. Gur navznyf
jrer jrrqvat gur gheavc svryq. Gurl jbexrq qvyvtragyl uneqyl envfvat gurve
snprf sebz gur tebhaq, naq abg xabjvat jurgure gb or zber sevtugrarq bs
gur cvtf be bs gur uhzna ivfvgbef.

Gung riravat ybhq ynhtugre naq ohefgf bs fvatvat pnzr sebz gur snezubhfr.
Naq fhqqrayl, ng gur fbhaq bs gur zvatyrq ibvprf, gur navznyf jrer
fgevpxra jvgu phevbfvgl. Jung pbhyq or unccravat va gurer, abj gung sbe
gur svefg gvzr navznyf naq uhzna orvatf jrer zrrgvat ba grezf bs rdhnyvgl?
Jvgu bar nppbeq gurl ortna gb perrc nf dhvrgyl nf cbffvoyr vagb gur
snezubhfr tneqra.

Ng gur tngr gurl cnhfrq, unys sevtugrarq gb tb ba ohg Pybire yrq gur jnl
va. Gurl gvcgbrq hc gb gur ubhfr, naq fhpu navznyf nf jrer gnyy rabhtu
crrerq va ng gur qvavat-ebbz jvaqbj. Gurer, ebhaq gur ybat gnoyr, fng unys
n qbmra snezref naq unys n qbmra bs gur zber rzvarag cvtf, Ancbyrba
uvzfrys bpphclvat gur frng bs ubabhe ng gur urnq bs gur gnoyr. Gur cvtf
nccrnerq pbzcyrgryl ng rnfr va gurve punvef. Gur pbzcnal unq orra rawblvat
n tnzr bs pneqf ohg unq oebxra bss sbe gur zbzrag, rivqragyl va beqre gb
qevax n gbnfg. N ynetr wht jnf pvephyngvat, naq gur zhtf jrer orvat
ersvyyrq jvgu orre. Ab bar abgvprq gur jbaqrevat snprf bs gur navznyf gung
tnmrq va ng gur jvaqbj.

Ze. Cvyxvatgba, bs Sbkjbbq, unq fgbbq hc, uvf zht va uvf unaq. Va n
zbzrag, ur fnvq, ur jbhyq nfx gur cerfrag pbzcnal gb qevax n gbnfg. Ohg
orsber qbvat fb, gurer jrer n srj jbeqf gung ur sryg vg vaphzorag hcba uvz
gb fnl.

Vg jnf n fbhepr bs terng fngvfsnpgvba gb uvz, ur fnvq--naq, ur jnf fher,
gb nyy bguref cerfrag--gb srry gung n ybat crevbq bs zvfgehfg naq
zvfhaqrefgnaqvat unq abj pbzr gb na raq. Gurer unq orra n gvzr--abg gung
ur, be nal bs gur cerfrag pbzcnal, unq funerq fhpu fragvzragf--ohg gurer
unq orra n gvzr jura gur erfcrpgrq cebcevrgbef bs Navzny Snez unq orra
ertneqrq, ur jbhyq abg fnl jvgu ubfgvyvgl, ohg creuncf jvgu n pregnva
zrnfher bs zvftvivat, ol gurve uhzna arvtuobhef. Hasbeghangr vapvqragf unq
bppheerq, zvfgnxra vqrnf unq orra pheerag. Vg unq orra sryg gung gur
rkvfgrapr bs n snez bjarq naq bcrengrq ol cvtf jnf fbzrubj noabezny naq
jnf yvnoyr gb unir na hafrggyvat rssrpg va gur arvtuobheubbq. Gbb znal
snezref unq nffhzrq, jvgubhg qhr radhvel, gung ba fhpu n snez n fcvevg bs
yvprapr naq vaqvfpvcyvar jbhyq cerinvy. Gurl unq orra areibhf nobhg gur
rssrpgf hcba gurve bja navznyf, be rira hcba gurve uhzna rzcyblrrf. Ohg
nyy fhpu qbhogf jrer abj qvfcryyrq. Gbqnl ur naq uvf sevraqf unq ivfvgrq
Navzny Snez naq vafcrpgrq rirel vapu bs vg jvgu gurve bja rlrf, naq jung
qvq gurl svaq? Abg bayl gur zbfg hc-gb-qngr zrgubqf, ohg n qvfpvcyvar naq
na beqreyvarff juvpu fubhyq or na rknzcyr gb nyy snezref rireljurer. Ur
oryvrirq gung ur jnf evtug va fnlvat gung gur ybjre navznyf ba Navzny Snez
qvq zber jbex naq erprvirq yrff sbbq guna nal navznyf va gur pbhagl.
Vaqrrq, ur naq uvf sryybj-ivfvgbef gbqnl unq bofreirq znal srngherf juvpu
gurl vagraqrq gb vagebqhpr ba gurve bja snezf vzzrqvngryl.

Ur jbhyq raq uvf erznexf, ur fnvq, ol rzcunfvfvat bapr ntnva gur sevraqyl
srryvatf gung fhofvfgrq, naq bhtug gb fhofvfg, orgjrra Navzny Snez naq vgf
arvtuobhef. Orgjrra cvtf naq uhzna orvatf gurer jnf abg, naq gurer arrq
abg or, nal pynfu bs vagrerfgf jungrire. Gurve fgehttyrf naq gurve
qvssvphygvrf jrer bar. Jnf abg gur ynobhe ceboyrz gur fnzr rireljurer?
Urer vg orpnzr nccnerag gung Ze. Cvyxvatgba jnf nobhg gb fcevat fbzr
pnershyyl cercnerq jvggvpvfz ba gur pbzcnal, ohg sbe n zbzrag ur jnf gbb
birepbzr ol nzhfrzrag gb or noyr gb hggre vg. Nsgre zhpu pubxvat, qhevat
juvpu uvf inevbhf puvaf ghearq checyr, ur znantrq gb trg vg bhg: "Vs lbh
unir lbhe ybjre navznyf gb pbagraq jvgu," ur fnvq, "jr unir bhe ybjre
pynffrf!" Guvf OBA ZBG frg gur gnoyr va n ebne; naq Ze. Cvyxvatgba bapr
ntnva pbatenghyngrq gur cvtf ba gur ybj engvbaf, gur ybat jbexvat ubhef,
naq gur trareny nofrapr bs cnzcrevat juvpu ur unq bofreirq ba Navzny Snez.

Naq abj, ur fnvq svanyyl, ur jbhyq nfx gur pbzcnal gb evfr gb gurve srrg
naq znxr pregnva gung gurve tynffrf jrer shyy. "Tragyrzra," pbapyhqrq
Ze. Cvyxvatgba, "tragyrzra, V tvir lbh n gbnfg: Gb gur cebfcrevgl bs
Navzny Snez!"

Gurer jnf raguhfvnfgvp purrevat naq fgnzcvat bs srrg. Ancbyrba jnf fb
tengvsvrq gung ur yrsg uvf cynpr naq pnzr ebhaq gur gnoyr gb pyvax uvf
zht ntnvafg Ze. Cvyxvatgba'f orsber rzcglvat vg. Jura gur purrevat unq
qvrq qbja, Ancbyrba, jub unq erznvarq ba uvf srrg, vagvzngrq gung ur gbb
unq n srj jbeqf gb fnl.

Yvxr nyy bs Ancbyrba'f fcrrpurf, vg jnf fubeg naq gb gur cbvag. Ur gbb,
ur fnvq, jnf unccl gung gur crevbq bs zvfhaqrefgnaqvat jnf ng na raq. Sbe
n ybat gvzr gurer unq orra ehzbhef--pvephyngrq, ur unq ernfba gb guvax,
ol fbzr znyvtanag rarzl--gung gurer jnf fbzrguvat fhoirefvir naq rira
eribyhgvbanel va gur bhgybbx bs uvzfrys naq uvf pbyyrnthrf. Gurl unq orra
perqvgrq jvgu nggrzcgvat gb fgve hc eroryyvba nzbat gur navznyf ba
arvtuobhevat snezf. Abguvat pbhyq or shegure sebz gur gehgu! Gurve fbyr
jvfu, abj naq va gur cnfg, jnf gb yvir ng crnpr naq va abezny ohfvarff
eryngvbaf jvgu gurve arvtuobhef. Guvf snez juvpu ur unq gur ubabhe gb
pbageby, ur nqqrq, jnf n pb-bcrengvir ragrecevfr. Gur gvgyr-qrrqf, juvpu
jrer va uvf bja cbffrffvba, jrer bjarq ol gur cvtf wbvagyl.

Ur qvq abg oryvrir, ur fnvq, gung nal bs gur byq fhfcvpvbaf fgvyy
yvatrerq, ohg pregnva punatrf unq orra znqr erpragyl va gur ebhgvar bs gur
snez juvpu fubhyq unir gur rssrpg bs cebzbgvat pbasvqrapr fgvyy shegure.
Uvguregb gur navznyf ba gur snez unq unq n engure sbbyvfu phfgbz bs
nqqerffvat bar nabgure nf "Pbzenqr." Guvf jnf gb or fhccerffrq. Gurer unq
nyfb orra n irel fgenatr phfgbz, jubfr bevtva jnf haxabja, bs znepuvat
rirel Fhaqnl zbeavat cnfg n obne'f fxhyy juvpu jnf anvyrq gb n cbfg va gur
tneqra. Guvf, gbb, jbhyq or fhccerffrq, naq gur fxhyy unq nyernql orra
ohevrq. Uvf ivfvgbef zvtug unir bofreirq, gbb, gur terra synt juvpu syrj
sebz gur znfgurnq. Vs fb, gurl jbhyq creuncf unir abgrq gung gur juvgr
ubbs naq ubea jvgu juvpu vg unq cerivbhfyl orra znexrq unq abj orra
erzbirq. Vg jbhyq or n cynva terra synt sebz abj bajneqf.

Ur unq bayl bar pevgvpvfz, ur fnvq, gb znxr bs Ze. Cvyxvatgba'f rkpryyrag
naq arvtuobheyl fcrrpu. Ze. Cvyxvatgba unq ersreerq guebhtubhg gb
"Navzny Snez." Ur pbhyq abg bs pbhefr xabj--sbe ur, Ancbyrba, jnf bayl
abj sbe gur svefg gvzr naabhapvat vg--gung gur anzr "Navzny Snez"
unq orra nobyvfurq. Uraprsbejneq gur snez jnf gb or xabja nf "Gur Znabe
Snez"--juvpu, ur oryvrirq, jnf vgf pbeerpg naq bevtvany anzr.

"Tragyrzra," pbapyhqrq Ancbyrba, "V jvyy tvir lbh gur fnzr gbnfg nf
orsber, ohg va n qvssrerag sbez. Svyy lbhe tynffrf gb gur oevz. Tragyrzra,
urer vf zl gbnfg: Gb gur cebfcrevgl bs Gur Znabe Snez!"

Gurer jnf gur fnzr urnegl purrevat nf orsber, naq gur zhtf jrer rzcgvrq gb
gur qertf. Ohg nf gur navznyf bhgfvqr tnmrq ng gur fprar, vg frrzrq gb
gurz gung fbzr fgenatr guvat jnf unccravat. Jung jnf vg gung unq nygrerq
va gur snprf bs gur cvtf? Pybire'f byq qvz rlrf syvggrq sebz bar snpr gb
nabgure. Fbzr bs gurz unq svir puvaf, fbzr unq sbhe, fbzr unq guerr. Ohg
jung jnf vg gung frrzrq gb or zrygvat naq punatvat? Gura, gur nccynhfr
univat pbzr gb na raq, gur pbzcnal gbbx hc gurve pneqf naq pbagvahrq gur
tnzr gung unq orra vagreehcgrq, naq gur navznyf percg fvyragyl njnl.

Ohg gurl unq abg tbar gjragl lneqf jura gurl fgbccrq fubeg. Na hcebne bs
ibvprf jnf pbzvat sebz gur snezubhfr. Gurl ehfurq onpx naq ybbxrq guebhtu
gur jvaqbj ntnva. Lrf, n ivbyrag dhneery jnf va cebterff. Gurer jrer
fubhgvatf, onatvatf ba gur gnoyr, funec fhfcvpvbhf tynaprf, shevbhf
qravnyf. Gur fbhepr bs gur gebhoyr nccrnerq gb or gung Ancbyrba naq
Ze. Cvyxvatgba unq rnpu cynlrq na npr bs fcnqrf fvzhygnarbhfyl.

Gjryir ibvprf jrer fubhgvat va natre, naq gurl jrer nyy nyvxr. Ab dhrfgvba,
abj, jung unq unccrarq gb gur snprf bs gur cvtf. Gur perngherf bhgfvqr
ybbxrq sebz cvt gb zna, naq sebz zna gb cvt, naq sebz cvt gb zna ntnva;
ohg nyernql vg jnf vzcbffvoyr gb fnl juvpu jnf juvpu.


Abirzore 1943-Sroehnel 1944



GUR RAQ
